Madrid [3] is the capital and the largest city of Spain, as well as the capital of the autonomous community of the same name (Comunidad de Madrid). The city has a population of approximately 3.2 million, and the metro area has a population of nearly 6.7 million. Madrid is best known for its great cultural and artistic heritage, a good example of which is the El Prado Museum. Madrid also boasts some of the liveliest nightlife in the world.
Understand

The etymology of Madrid’s name is shrouded in myth and takes long stories to explain possible meanings. On the spot, the locals will be precise about all the details.

    Tourist Information Point of Plaza de Callao (Punto de Información Turística de la Plaza de Callao), Pl. del Callao, 28013 Madrid, ☎ +34 915 787 810, [x]. Also, other tourist information office is on Plaza Mayor 

Location

Madrid is located just northeast of the geographical center of the Iberian Peninsula, in the middle of the Spanish central Castillian plateau (Meseta central), at an average altitude of 650m. Nearly all of the most famous tourist areas are located in the center of the city including Puerta del Sol, Plaza Mayor, Palacio Real, and Plaza de Colón. The major streets in Madrid include the Gran Via, Alcalá Street, and Paseo de la Castellana. The oldest parts of the city are located on the hills next to the left bank of the Manzanares River.
Climate

The climate of Madrid is continental, mainly dry and quite extreme at times. Madrid sees perpetual sunshine, a characteristically hot and dry summer, and a fairly cold winter with frequent frosts during the night and the occasional snowfall. Spring and autumn are mild with the most rainfall concentrated in these seasons. Madrid has over 300 days of sunshine per year, making it one of the sunniest cities in Europe. Spring and autumn are definitely the best times to visit, especially the months of April, May, June, September, and October. There is a very little rainfall during summer and also less rainfall during winter. During winter snow occurs sporadically; however, snowfall usually lasts only for a few days, but there is abundant snowfall in the adjacent mountain ranges nearby.
Culture
Plaza Mayor

The culture of Madrid is largely influenced by its royal history, as the center of the Spanish Empire. The Royal Palace, big places and buildings used by the Spanish Monarchy. Enormous cathedrals and churches are plentiful in Madrid, as well as medieval architecture, although nowadays Madrid is as cosmopolitan a city as Berlin or London, full of new architecture, lifestyle and culture.

As the Spanish Capital, Madrid has been emblematic of the different "establishments" for most Spaniards. During the 2nd Republic (1931-1936) it was a bustling city of new ideas. As the capital of the Francoist dictatorship (1939-1975), the city still appears to many Spaniards as a conservative part of Spain. However, the city was also the epicenter of the famous Movida, the Spanish movement of the 80s that raised figures such as director Pedro Almodóvar. The heritage of this era is indeed still visible in the city center, where a party can be found at all times and one of the most liberal and colorful environments of Spain can be seen.

The citizens of Madrid, who refer to themselves as Madrileños or the more traditional and currently seldom used term "gatos" (cats), live by a daily routine that is heavily influenced by the climate. Due to the typical midday heat during summer, a "siesta" can be still observed during which some citizens take a break to cool off. Madrileños can usually only afford this "luxury" during holidays and weekends. Most stores are open all day; only smaller stores are often closed during this time. Workers and those more affected by the Western lifestyle choose not to take this long break and work traditional working hours, which are usually 9am to 7pm. During the summer many offices, however, will have a summer schedule requiring workers to start at 8am and finish at 3pm (most commonly without the standard 1-2 hour break for lunch). Offices usually close during the weekend but businesses are often open Saturday morning (downtown stays open until the afternoon). Most grocers are closed on Sundays, but some major chain and department stores linked to "culture" (books, music, etc.) will be open throughout the day, and all of them on the first Sunday of the month. Shops and department stores in Puerta del Sol area are open every day.

Madrid possibly has the largest number of bars per capita of any European city and a very active nightlife. Madrileños are known to stay up until as late as 5AM-7AM. It is quite common to see a crowded Gran Vía on weekend nights. It is important to note that, due to this lifestyle, lodging located near the fun areas may end up a nightmare for light sleepers if your window faces the street.

Madrid has a very modernized and elaborate transportation network of buses and the Metro. The city contrasts with some large European cities in that it is extremely clean, and city employees in bright yellow vests can almost always be seen cleaning the streets and sidewalks. Like most large cities, however, there is a substantial population of vagrants and beggars lining the streets.

Madrid is one of the biggest and most cosmopolitan cities in Europe. Communities of West Africans, North Africans, other Europeans, Chinese, Indians, Filipinos, Pakistanis, and (especially) Latin Americans are prominent.

Some popular neighborhoods are:

    Alonso Martínez - Many pubs and small discos are active until about 3AM. A very young crowd, and if you′re around here before midnight, and over the age of 20, prepare to feel positively old. Most places close around 3AM, then people move to nearby areas to continue partying (clubs in Gran Vía or Tribunal).
    Barrio de las Letras / Huertas - Many of Spain's most famous writers lived there (Cervantes, Quevedo, etc.). It's in between Lavapiés, Puerta del Sol, and Paseo del Prado. It is an area full of history and interesting buildings and is also well-known because of its concentration of bars, pubs, restaurants, and hotels. Plaza de Santa Ana is a beautiful square. It can be considered "too touristic" for some local people.
    Chueca - Near Malasaña and Gran Vía. It is the gay district (although no one is ever excluded) with a very strong personality. New design, trendy shops, cool cafes. Pop and electronic music. By far, the most cosmopolitan place in town. Has become quite chic and expensive.
    Ciudad Universitaria - area where most of the students reside as there are several dorms in this area. There are many cheap bars with great nightlife starting from Thursdays.
    Conde Duque - Like Malasaña, this district shares a similar audience. Calle Conde Duque is full of cafés and restaurants. Between the main squares in the district, Plaza de Guardias de Corps and Plaza de las Comendadoras, you will also find other options to have drinks, cafés, or tapas. The Conde Duque Cultural Centre usually hosts shows, concerts, and exhibitions.
    Gran Vía - The place that never sleeps. A major street that includes many popular nightclubs usually is open from 1AM to 6-7AM.
    La Latina - It is the place near Lavapiés to go for tapas and is full of bohemian young people looking for stylish bars. In the old section, many small bars and pubs, a generally older crowd (the late 20s, 30s - you know, "adults"). Contains La Cava Baja street. Avoid places in the Plaza Mayor but sunbathing and beers are suitable. Multiple bars serving fantastic tapas in the Cava Baja and Cuchilleros. The area centered on Calle Calatrava (what the locals call 'Chuecatina') is has developed into a gay (very hetero-friendly) zone. It's surprisingly very crowded on Sunday mornings, from 11AM to late in the afternoon due to its close location to the flea market El Rastro.
    Lavapiés - Multicultural quarter of the city, with more than 50% foreign residents, mostly from Africa, Asia, and Latin America. An increasing amount of westerners are choosing Lavapies as their residence in Madrid, mainly because of the hip vibe it has attained in recent years. Plenty of world music bars and many alternative theaters and art galleries. Lavapiés is maybe the most cosmopolitan and hippy area at the same time in Madrid. Indian restaurants, alternative cafés, African music, and South American shops. Several community gardens, food co-ops, and eco shops are scattered around the district. Not a lot of tourists here since the quarter holds no monumental sights but has a rather unique atmosphere. Walking around for a beer or a coffee is well worth it.
    Moncloa - Due to its proximity to the main University in Madrid (Universidad Complutense), Moncloa is associated with students and a student lifestyle, many cheap bars, and discos as it is near the university, although some of the places are best avoided.
    Salamanca - Plenty of expensive boutiques, unique shops with impossible prices, and department stores.
    Torre Europa. In front of the stadium, under the tower, there were several luxury pubs and clubs. There are 4 or 5 bars and discos in the Avenida de Brazil area catering to a young and student crowd.
    Tribunal / Malasaña - Hip area. You can enjoy a café, a dinner, a book or just some drinks. Mainly rock and pop music clubs, some of them still open from "La movida madrileña" (a vibrant cultural period from the early 80s). Calle Manuela Malasaña is a great place to eat. Such is Calle del Pez although it has mostly bars. Plaza Dos de Mayo is the heart of the district and a great place to have a drink.

Get in
By plane
Barajas airport

Adolfo Suárez Madrid-Barajas Airport (IATA: MAD), +34 902 404 704, [4] is located 13km from the city center. It is one of the largest airports in Europe and is serviced by many airlines, as well as being the home base for Iberia Airlines. The airport has 4 terminals. Terminals 1, 2, and 3 are close together and served by the same metro station, while Terminal 4 is far from those and has its own metro and commuter train stations.

The traveler may be required to show a valid visa at the airport immigration, depending both on the duration and purpose of their stay in Spain[5].

The best way to move downtown is to take the Metro (line 8 pink, from 06:30 to 01:30, to/from the airport) to Nuevos Ministerios station from all terminals. It is clean, safe, frequent, fast, and inexpensive. The airport is located within the city limits of Madrid and is just 9 km (6 miles) away in 25 minutes from the city's financial district. In order to reach the city center (Sol, Ópera, or Gran Vía), or other stations consult the metro map.

Terminal 4 of the airport, in additionally to the metro network, is also connected to the city by Cercanias commuter train[6] (line C-1, from 06:00 to 22:30, €3.10) which goes directly to Atocha and Chamartin mainline train stations. To connect the Sol, take the train (look for Renfe Cercanias) to "Nuevos Ministerios" and then transfer to line C-3 or C-4 southbound on platform 8. Sol will be the first stop. If you are connecting to a long-distance or AVE train at Atocha or Chamartin, then your Cercanias (C-1, and any connecting C trains) ticket is free. You will still need to get the actual Cercanias ticket. Ask at the RENFE kiosk at Barajas Terminal 4 directly across from the automatic machines where most people purchase their C-1 ticket (just before you reach the C-1 turnstiles). Show your ticket to the attendant and they'll issue your free Cercanias ticket.

Another way of reaching downtown is a 24-hour express bus service[7] that passes all terminals and then goes direct to O'Donell, Cibeles (20 minutes walk or quick metro ride to Puerta del Sol) and Atocha (main train station, not serviced between 11:30 PM and 6 AM). The ticket is paid in cash to the bus driver. Departures every 12 minutes (daytime) to 35 minutes (late at night). Travel time Terminal 4 (end of the line) - Cibeles 30-40 minutes.

Public bus No 200 operates between the airport and Avenida de América bus station in Madrid. You can use disposable, weekly, or 10-trip tickets. Bus 114 does NOT go to the airport terminals and is a 40-minute walk to Terminal 1.

Public night bus N4 goes from Plaza Cibeles to Barajas district, a 400m walk from the terminal through a passageway over the highway. Best to get off at the second-last stop, Avenida General, and then make a right turn immediately after the bus stop. Go straight on, keep going straight crossing the parking lot, and then make a left to cross another huge parking lot. After that, you see the road and the pedestrian highway overpass. The disposable or the 10-trip ticket is valid.

From the Airport it is also possible to take a taxi. Journeys between the airport and the inner M30 area (city center), or vice versa, including those reserved electronically, are subject to a flat rate.

    Book Taxi Madrid (Mercedes Taxi Service), (info@booktaxispain.com), [x]. 24hs. Premium Airport transfers to any destination. Online booking, immediate confirmation.
    EuropeShuttle (Airport Transfers & Chauffeur Services Worldwide=), ☎ +44 20 3318 1696 (booking@europeshuttle.com), [x]. 24hs. Europe Shuttle offers the airport taxi transfer from or to Madrid Barajas Airport to any destination.
    MadShuttle (Airport Transfers and Shuttle Services=), ☎ +34 91 125 1008 (booking@madshuttle.com), [x]. 24hs. Mad Shuttle operates 24 / 7 / 365 between the airport and city centre with all type of vehicles.
    TaxiLeader.net (Madrid Airport Taxi), (customerservice@taxileader.net), [x]. 24hrs. Private Taxi with Driver Waiting for you at Airport Exit. 

By train
Tropical garden in Atocha

    Renfe, ☎ +34 902-240-202, [x]. A train service operates to/from Madrid. Frequent trains operate between Madrid and Barcelona (2h 40min), Seville (2h 20 min), Malaga (2h 30 min), Zaragoza, Tarragona, Lleida, Huesca, Ciudad Real, Puertollano, Lisbon, Milan, the French coast, Paris, with continuing journeys to most of Europe. 

Madrid has two train stations: Chamartín and Atocha, both of which have excellent Metro and Cercanias commuter train connections. Most northbound and international trains arrive and depart from Chamartín station, while trains to Barcelona, Valencia and southern Spain depart from Atocha. If you need to get between the two stations, Metro line 1 (30-40 minutes) or Cercanias lines C3 and C4 (15 minutes) offer the most direct connection.

Chamartín station is on the north side of the city and is served by the Metro stop of the same name on Metro lines 1 and 10.

Atocha is on the southern side of the city center and is divided into two main sections, an area for Cercanias trains and one for long-distance trains. The long-distance side is set inside the towering old station, where you will find a tropical garden with a pond full of small turtles as well as a number of shops. A memorial to the victims of the terrorist attack is in the Cercanias portion of the station near the Metro stop.
By bus

Madrid has eight enormous international and intercity bus stations. Information on where buses to a particular destination depart from can be found at the Tourist Office.

Many of the international buses, and those headed south of Madrid, arrive at and depart from Estación Sur de Autobuses, Calle de Méndez Álvaro, Tel.+34 91-468-4200, [8] which is accessible by metro.

Buses to and from Barcelona and Bilbao operate from the Avenida de América bus terminal, also accessible by Metro.
By car

There are car rental facilities available at the airport, train stations, and other main travel sites. Always be sure to have a street map handy! The roads within Madrid are difficult to navigate as there are no places to stop so it's very handy to look at a map or check your route.

Also, if you are relying on GPS navigation, be aware that there are several consecutive junctions underground near the center and your GPS may not get a signal underground. Plan your turns before you enter the tunnels.

Madrid city is well covered by the main global car rental companies, such as Avis, Budget, Hertz, Thrifty & Europcar, some of these also provide Rent to Buy Facilities. All car rental companies offer competitive pricing for economy-class vehicles and unlimited mileage options. Some local car rental companies may also offer competitive pricing.

Parking within the city follows the pay-and-display system, daily from 9am to 9pm (limited on Saturdays, and all of August, to 9am to 15pm, and being free on Sundays).
Get around
By public transit

Madrid has one of the best public transport networks in the world and the second largest metro network in Europe, second only to London's. Buses and subways form an integrated network and work with the same ticket. Alternatively, you can buy unlimited travel passes as follows: 1 day, 2 days, 3 days, 5 days, or 7 days. Children under the age of 4 may travel without a ticket. Children under 11 receive a 50% discount. Tickets can be purchased at Metro stations, newsstands, and estancos (tobacconists').
Train

Madrid has a system of local trains Cercanías that connect outlying suburbs and villages with the city center. Although most useful for visiting historic or outdoor destinations outside the city core, they are also useful for quickly getting from the north end of the city (Chamartin and Nuevos Ministerios) to the south end of the city (Sol and Atocha) and, Barajas airport (terminal 4).
Metro
Tourist map of the Madrid Metro

The Metro de Madrid [9] (Madrid's Subway/Underground) is one of the better and less expensive metros in Europe. It is an underground railway network that covers practically the entire metropolitan area and airport. In addition, the underground tunnels of the Metro provide relief from the sun on hot days. Ticket machines are multilingual with instructions in Spanish, English, French, and German.

The Tourist Card is the most practical ticket for visitors, valid for all the public transportation system (metro + buses + trains) for 1, 2, 3, 5, or 7 calendar days and 2 zones: A and T. Prices depend upon the selection and validity. It is an electronic contactless card and can be purchased from ticket machines at all Metro stations, including the airport. Credit cards are accepted, but if your card doesn’t work even with a PIN, the airport metro has a counter which sells this card and has a credit card terminal.

When you travel to or from airport stations, there is an additional supplement, which can be paid at the entrance or exit. The Passes or Tourist Card do not require this supplement - it is included in the price. You can catch some trains as late as 2:00AM, although the official closing time for the metro system is at 1:30AM.

Announcements in the metro are made in both Spanish and English on most major lines, including the line to and from the airport. Along with this, almost all metro stops have a map of the exits and the surrounding area above the station. However, most stations don't have a map of the Metro lines on the platform so prepare for your travel in advance and don't expect to plan your journey on the go.
Bus

Whatever the Metro doesn't cover, the buses do. Night buses (Búhos, "night owls"), have their main hub at Plaza de Cibeles, covering most of the city at roughly 20-minute intervals. Buses are equipped with a free wi-fi facility (EMTmadrid), easy to use with any type of laptop or netbook.
By taxi

Taxis can be hard to find during late hours on weekends, especially if there is some rain. Unlike in other European cities, there are few taxi stands. Just stand by the side of a major road or bus stop and wave your hand to signal an available taxi passing by. Available taxis have a green libre sign on the windshield and a green light on top.

Official taxis are white and have a red stripe and the flag of Madrid on the front door. The tariff is displayed on top of the car (a 1 during the daytime, a 2 during the night, which becomes 2 and 3 on holidays such as Christmas Eve).

There are also special surcharges for entering or leaving the airport/train station. Ask for the written table of tariffs and charges (suplementos) (shown on small stickers on rear windows, compulsory by law) before paying if you think it's too expensive.

Be aware there are some taxi drivers that will do what is called 'la vuelta al ruedo' which basically means they will drive you around or through the crowded avenues to increase the fare.

Most taxi drivers do not speak English, so you should have the names and/or addresses of your destinations written in Spanish to show your taxi driver. Likewise, get your hotel's business card in case you get lost.
By car

Transportation by private automobile in Madrid can be a nightmare. The Spanish capital suffers from the typical problems of most big cities; far too many cars and not enough space to accommodate them. Sometimes there can even be traffic jams in the Paseo de la Castellana at 3:00 AM (early to some Madrileños). The problem is compounded by the narrow streets in the old town, where a lorry delivering beer barrels to a local bar can cause a huge tailback. Finding a parking space can be very time-consuming, and difficult if one is not skilled in the art of close proximity parallel parking. Many Spaniards are also lacking in this art, prompting them to simply park in the street, blocking other cars in. If you find yourself blocked in by such a practice, honk your horn until the driver returns. If you parallel park your car in Madrid, be aware that most Madrileños park by sound alone. They will feel no remorse for repeatedly hitting the car in front and behind them while trying to get into or out of a tight spot. If you value your car's paint job, or you have rented a car, it may be best to park underground. Though this is no guarantee for nobody hitting your car, the chances are somewhat diminished.

In short, renting a car is not only unnecessary, but not recommended for getting around downtown Madrid, and a car is likely to be more of a liability than an asset. Visitors should make use of Madrid's excellent public transportation instead. Renting a car only makes sense if you are planning to leave Madrid and drive to the nearby towns.
By bicycle
El Retiro

Although Madrid does not appear as a bike-friendly city at a first sight, things are changing slowly to make the bike experience more comfortable. Several streets in the historical downtown have been transformed into mixed-traffic spaces where pedestrians and bikes have priority over cars. There are new easy-bike paths all along the river and connecting important parks.

It is also possible to use a lot of narrow easy streets where traffic is slow and calm to travel along the city without depending on exclusive bike paths. There are some official and unofficial publications on these streets along the web[10].

To avoid some of Madrid's inconveniencies, such as hot weather or slopy streets it is also possible to get bikes on Metro and Railways trains with some schedule restrictions, and on every public transport without restrictions when using folding-bikes.

There is a public rent-a-bike service Bicimad[11]. There are also some rental shops in the historical center area such as the company Baja Bikes[12] and Urban Zero[13]. These companies offer several rental points in Madrid (Retiro, Atocha, Madrid-Río, etc.). They offer Guided and self-guided bicycle tours, using electric or conventional bicycles.
By segway

Madrid is relatively flat, so it's easily to move by bicycle, skateboard, rollerblade. Book a segway tour in Madrid[14] or rent one and move through the city without walking. It's secure. If you want to know more about the different sights, what to do, where to eat or hang out you should go with a guide.
Talk

While knowledge of the English language is increasing among the younger generations, the majority of Madrid's residents know only a few words — even employees at American businesses such as McDonald's, KFC, or Burger King, and employees at cash exchange centers rarely speak much English. You can often find someone with a fair grasp of English at larger hotels and tourism sites, but it would nevertheless be helpful to know at least a few common Spanish words and phrases.
See
Galleries

    Art Gallery Tour, [x]. Art Gallery Tour is a pioneering initiative that brings people closer to the world of contemporary art through guided tours of the best and most important galleries & exhibitions in Madrid situated in magnificent spaces in the three most historic districts of Madrid: Salesas, Letters, Salamanca, and Dr. Fourquet St. It is a great opportunity to discover Madrid & its cultural heritage. Their main goal is to democratize art in Spain, raising awareness of contemporary art and stimulating the art market.
    Art galleries (Asociación de Galerías de Arte), (which display and sell art), [x]. They can mostly be found via Asociación. Only they have a great map of all associated galleries that will lead you to a great variety of places to discover great art, established or upcoming. Most galleries will also be able and willing to provide you with the map in paper form. Many of these galleries are located in the Barrios de Lavapiés, las Letras, Salamanca, and Las Salesas (upper part of the Chueca Neighborhood), while you may find some treasures elsewhere, too. For the neighborhoods with more galleries, just wander around the neighborhoods, step in some of them, and "get lost in art". In some neighborhoods you may need to ring a bell to have the personnel open the door, feel free to do that, you are most generally really welcome.
    Centro Cultural Sanchinarro, C. Princesa de Éboli, 29, 28050 Madrid, ☎ +34 915000603 (info@centroculturalsanchinarro.com), [x]. The Center is located north of Madrid. The Cultural Center Sanchinarro is an ample public space dedicated to art and culture. It offers a program of shows and high-level activities specially designed to accommodate a multitude of artistic, and cultural offerings and specialized courses. It also has great facilities with plentiful time. Sanchinarro Cultural Center was founded with the goal of becoming the main cultural landmark of northern Madrid. This Madrid City Council, owner of this equipment, cultural management entrusted to space Tritoma company, which has more than 25 years of experience in the sector. At the Cultural Centre Sanchinarro, you can access a wide program of activities of the highest quality. The plan includes courses, exhibitions, and shows that include the main trends and artistic and cultural scenes. Check the programming section to view upcoming activities. There you can enjoy the facilities of the Centre, including an auditorium, classroom technologies, study hall, exhibition halls, and multi-purpose rooms. Companies and individuals can rent these spaces for their own activities, presentations, conferences, events, etc. All this is in a symbolic space that is one of the leading architectural northern Madrid. A place where you can meet all kinds of people who share your tastes, hobbies, and interests.
    Galería La Caja Negra, C. de Fernando VI, 17, 2º Izq, 28004 Madrid, ☎ +34 913104360, [x]. Located in the town of Torrejon de Ardoz, the Art Fund is a large public space dedicated to art and culture. It offers a program of shows and high-level activities in which everyone has a place. The Art Fund was created with the goal of becoming the leading cultural reference of the Henares Corridor. This Torrejón City Council, the owner of the equipment, has entrusted the management of the spaces of the Auditorium/conference room, study room, and cafeteria to Tritoma company, which has 25 years of experience in the sector. On the premises of the Art Box, you can access a wide program of activities of the highest quality. Check the programming section to view upcoming activities. Companies and individuals can rent their space for their own activities, presentations, conferences, events, etc. 

Landmarks and architecture
Puerta del Sol

    Almudena Cathedral (Catedral de la Almudena), (Metro: Opera (lines 2, 5 and R)), [x]. This massive cathedral faces the Palacio Real. Finished near the end of the 20th century, it is the church where the Princes of Asturias Felipe and Letizia were married in 2004.
    Castile Square (Plaza de Castilla), (Metro: Plaza de Castilla (lines 1, 9 and 10); Bus line 27). On the north side of the city and bisected by Paseo de la Castellana, this plaza is in the center of Madrid's skyscraper district. A tall obelisk sits in the center of the plaza while the Gate of Europe (Puerta de Europa) two slanted towers framing the boulevard, are situated on the north side of the plaza. Taking the #27 bus, which runs along Paseo del Prado and Paseo de la Castellana ends at Plaza de Castilla, will take you past several Madrid highrises. North of the Plaza is the Four Towers (Cuatro Torres), actually five new skyscrapers (Torre Cepsa 248 m (815 ft), Torre PwC 236 m (774 ft), Torre de Cristal 249 m (817 ft), Torre Espacio 230 m (750 ft), Fifth Tower 180 m (591 ft)) that are the tallest in Spain. The construction of the skyscrapers began in 2004. 

Palacio de Cibeles, Madrid's city hall, Cibeles Square

    Cibeles square (Plaza de Cibeles), (Metro: Banco de España (line 2)), [x]. A massive roundabout at the intersection of Calle de Alcala and Paseo del Prado. This plaza houses one of Madrid's icons, the Fountain of Cibeles, which portrays the Roman goddess of fertility sitting upon a chariot carried by two lions. On the southeast corner dominating the Plaza is one of the world's most beautiful city halls, the Palacio de Cibeles (formerly the Palacio de las Comunicaciones), an impressive structure with a jaw-droppingly spectacular facade. Inside you can climb to the upper floors for the excellent views out the window and look out too. On the southwest corner of the square sits the imposing Bank of Spain (Banco de España) building, while the northeast corner is home to the Palacio de Linares, which holds the Casa de América [1], a cultural center with an art gallery of Latin American works.
    Eastern Square (Plaza de Oriente), Calle Bailen (Metro: Opera (lines 2, 5 and R). Located between the Palacio Real and the Teatro Real). Baroque-style gardens surrounds a large monument to Philip IV. Dozens of statues of other kings line the garden. In good weather, there are often quite a few street performers here.
    Gran Vía, (Metro: Banco de España (line 2), Gran Via (lines 1 and 5), Callao (lines 3 and 5), Santo Domingo (line 2), or Plaza de España (lines 3 and 10)). Literally "Great Way" (better translated as "Broadway"), Gran Vía is one of the busiest avenues in Madrid. Running from Plaza de España to Plaza de Cibeles, it is a location of the cinema district and a number of shopping malls and is lined with large billboards and lights. There's a constant buzz of traffic and life. From 3-4 early morning traffic jams are not unusual.
    Main Square (Plaza Mayor), (Metro: Sol (lines 1, 2 and 3) or Opera (lines 2, 5 and R)). Perhaps the best known plaza in Madrid. This impressive square is now one of the main stops on any tourist's visit. Originally built outside the city walls, this enclosed square hosted bullfights, markets, symphonies, tournaments and executions. Today it is ringed with tourist shops, cafes and restaurants. The statue of Philip III sits in the middle across from the Casa de la Panadería, a beautifully painted building with two towers on the north side of the square (not to be confused with the other building with two towers on the opposite side) which once served as the headquarters of the bakers' guild and now houses a tourist information office. Access to the square is via one of the many arcades which connect to the surrounding pedestrian streets. 

Royal Palace. The palace is occupied by the Spanish monarch if the Royal flag flies on the empty flagpole on the right

    Royal Palace of Madrid (Palacio Real de Madrid), Calle Bailen (Metro: Opera (lines 2, 5 and R)), ☎ +34 91 4548800, [x]. M-Sa 9:00-17:00, Su and holidays 9:00-15:00, closed occasionally for official ceremonies. The Palacio Real (Royal Palace) is an enormous palace, one of the biggest in Europe, with plains of concrete around it. Though it is the official residence of the King of Spain, the royal family does not actually reside here and it is generally used only for state ceremonies. The Royal Palace is considered to be one of the most iconic and beautiful buildings in Madrid, not only for its location (overlooking the river valley) but also for its architecture and the artistic treasures to be found in the rooms. A simple one-way tour of the palace (both self-guided and guided are available) takes you up the grand stairway and through the lavishly decorated state rooms with their elegant tapestries, frescoes, porcelain, carvings and added decor like china, silverware, medals, etc. From the courtyard, you can access the Farmacia (Pharmacy), which contains hundreds of bottles of early medicines and a reconstructed laboratory, and the Real Armorial (Royal Armory), a two-story collection of medieval weapons and armor. Explanations in the armory are in Spanish only, so do not expect to understand much unless your know the Spanish names for all that medieval weaponry. The lines to get in are very long, especially on Wednesday when the place is free - try to go early. Photography inside the palace is not allowed.
    Spain Square (Plaza de España), (Metro: Plaza de España (lines 3 and 10) or Noviciado (line 2)). A prominent square on the northwest side of the central district, adjacent to two of the tallest buildings in Madrid: the Torre de Madrid (the taller, white one) and the Edificio España (the red and white one). The square contains a large fountain and a sculpture of Cervantes with his famous Don Quixote and Sancho Panza characters.
    St. Michael's Market (Mercado de San Miguel), Pl. de San Miguel, 28005 Madrid (Metro: Opera (lines 2, 5 and R)), [x]. This indoor market is located near Plaza Mayor and identifiable by its ornate iron posts. Built in 1913, it's full of a wide range of high-quality food. Even if you're not buying anything, it's worth entering for the sights and smells of dried ham, fine wine, freshly baked goods, and other treats from the vendors inside.
    Sun Gate (Puerta del Sol), (Metro: Sol (lines 1, 2 and 3)). This plaza is the heart of Madrid and one of the busiest places in the city - a hub for the local transit system, a favorite meeting spot for locals, an area for festivals or political demonstrations, and a suitable location for tour guides, street performers, pickpockets and anyone else looking to take advantage of all the tourists on hand. In the center of the plaza sits the Statue of King Charles III on horseback, facing the Royal Post Office (Real Casa de Correos), the red-and-white building adorned with a clock tower on the plaza's south side. Originally the building served as Madrid's first post office, then the police headquarters under Franco before being transformed into its current use as the office of the President of Madrid, the head of the regional government. The clock tower is noteworthy for being the center focus of New Year's celebrations every year, which are broadcast across Spain and mark the traditional eating of the Twelve Grapes (one for each ring of the bell) and the beginning of a new year. In front of the building is Kilometer Zero (Kilómetro Cero), a plaque showing the point where the measuring of the national highway system begins. On the east side of the plaza is the famous Bear and the Madroño Tree Statue, a bear climbing a madroño tree, which is the symbol of Madrid. Nearby the giant neon sign of Tío Pepe sits above the plaza and is a famous figure of this area.
    Town Square (Plaza de la Villa), (Metro: Opera (lines 2, 5 and R)). The main square during the Middle Ages, as Calle Mayor (High Street) was the main street as well. It houses the former City Hall, the former Academy of Fine Arts, and the Archbishopric. 

Museum Triangle
The northern entrance to Prado

This is Madrid's museum district, named for the three major art museums clustered along Paseo del Prado east of the old city: the Museo del Prado, one of the finest art museums in the world, the Thyssen-Bornemisza, a baron's collection of classical art, and the Reina Sofia Madrid's modern art museum. However, a couple of smaller museums also occupy the neighborhood which are worth seeing as well. It is important to note that many of the museums offer free entry during the certain times most days. It varies by museum and day, if you are looking to take advantage of these beautiful museums with a lesser budget, it's still possible and you are willing to queue. For example, the Prado sometimes has queues of over 200 meters with several hundred people, yet one could stroll into the Thyssen on Monday at 1pm.
Vertical garden, CaixaForum

    Caixa Forum, Paseo de Prado, 36 (Metro: Atocha (line 1)), ☎ +34 913307300, [x]. A private museum of contemporary art and culture that is particularly well-known for the "vertical garden" by Patrick Blanc installed on a wall in front of the museum, as well as the quite special architecture of the building itself. The vertical garden can be seen from the street outside, just a block south of the Thyssen-Bornemisza and across from the Prado. Inside the museum has free exhibitions and functions.
    Naval Museum, Paseo del Prado 5. (Metro: Banco de España (line 2)), [x]. Beautiful museum with vast interesting collections about Spanish sailing. The Juan De La Cosa map, the oldest known map showing America, is held here. You will be asked for a donation on the free days. Free on Saturdays and Sundays..
    Prado Museum (Museo del Prado), Paseo de Prado (Metro: Atocha (line 1) or Banco de España (line 2); Bus lines 9, 10, 14, 19, 27, 34, 37 and 45), ☎ +34 90 2107077, [x]. Mo-Sa 10AM-8PM, Su 10AM-7PM. Closed and reduced hours on some holidays.. One of the finest art collections in the world and the best collection of classical art in Madrid. It includes many different collections: the Spanish (El Greco, Velázquez, and Goya), the Flemish and Dutch (Rubens, van Dyck, and Brueghel), Italian (Botticelli, Tintoretto, Titian, Caravaggio, and Veronese) and German (Albrecht Dürer, Lucas Cranach, and Baldung Grien). The Prado Museum currently offers free entry Monday to Saturday, 6pm to 8pm, and Sundays and holidays from 5pm to 7pm. The museum can be extremely busy during free entry hours, with several hundred people waiting in line for hours, so please consider if it is worth. Some highlights not to miss at the Prado: the Bosch masterpiece The Garden of Earthly Delights, the famous Velázquez piece Las Meninas, the Black Paintings, The Third of May 1808 by Goya, Adoration of the Shepards by El Greco, and David with the Head of Goliath by Caravaggio. Be sure to walk along Paseo del Prado, a pedestrian walkway full of fountains and trees. Nice affordable restaurant on the main floor.
    Reina Sofía National Museum and Art Center, Santa Isabel 52 (Metro: Atocha (line 1)), ☎ +34 91 7741000 (fax: +34 91 7741056), [x]. M, W-Sa 10AM-9PM, Su 10AM-2:30PM. Houses Madrid's best collection of modern art. It includes many of Pablo Picasso's most revered works including the renowned Guernica. The Reina Sofía also houses masterpieces by Miró, Kandinsky, Dalí, Bacon, and more. The Reina Sofia National Museum and Art Center offer free entry into the museums on Sundays 3:00 to 7:00 (times change frequently).
    Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum of Art, Paseo de Prado, 8 (Metro: Banco de España (line 2)), ☎ +34 913 69 01 51 ‎, [x]. Tu-Su 10AM-7PM. The ticket office closes at 6:30PM. The Museum is closed all day on 1 Jan, 1 May, and 25 Dec. Contains a large art collection including masterpieces by Monet, Goya, Degas, Renoir, Van Gogh, Picasso, Mondrian, Bacon and Lichtenstein. The Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum of Art offers free entry on Monday afternoons courtesy of Mastercard for everyone, from 12:00 to 4:00. 

Other museums

    Costume Museum (Museo del Traje), Avenida de Juan de Herrera 2 (Metro: Moncloa (lines 3 and 6) or Ciudad Universitaria (line 6)), ☎ +34 91 5504700, [x]. Tu-Sa 9:30AM-7PM, Su 10:00AM-3PM. Closed 1, 6 Jan, 1, 15 May, 24, 25, 31 Dec. Offers a wide selection of historical and more temporary costumes from the early 1200s up to now. There are shown the aspects of the different cultures of Spain. The museum also organizes many activities and events.
    Count-Duke Barracks (Cuartel del Conde Duque), Calle Conde Duque 9, 28015 Madrid, [x]. Municipal Museum of Contemporary Art.
    Geo-mining Museum (Museo Geominero), C. de Ríos Rosas, 23, 28003 Madrid (Metro: Rios Rosas), ☎ +34 91 349 5759, [x]. Mo-Su: 9am-2pm. Part of the Spanish Institute of Geology and Mining. This museum is dedicated to Geology (with a focus on Mineralogy) and Paleontology, containing an impressive collection of fossils and minerals discovered on the territory of Spain and abroad. Also contains educational exhibits, although everything is described in Spanish only. The interior of the building is just as impressive and may be worth a quick tour even if you are not particularly interested in Paleontology and Mineralogy. Free.
    Museum of America (Museo de América), Avenida Reyes Católicos 6 (Metro: Moncloa (lines 3 and 6)), ☎ +34 91 5492641, [x]. Tu-Sa: 9:30AM-3PM, Su 10:00AM-3PM, Closed Mondays, Jan 1, May 1, Dec 24, 25, 31. An excellent museum that many tourists miss. Houses thousands of artifacts from the Americas. The exhibit displays objects from many native cultures from before European conquest to colonial times and beyond. Don't miss the Tesoro (Treasure) de Los Químbayas, a collection of gold objects that was given as a gift by the Colombian government. Also of interest is the Tudela Codex, an Aztec law book from the 1500s. Beware: most explanations of the objects on display are in Spanish only.
    Museum of History of Madrid (Museo de Historia de Madrid), Calle Fuencarral 78 (Metro: Tribunal (lines 1 and 10)), ☎ +34 917 011 863, [x]. Mo Closed, Tu-Su: 9:30am-8pm. This museum is dedicated to the history of Madrid from 1561 to present. Much of the history is explained by references to the paintings on display depicting people or events of the time, so it is also an art museum. Several maps and models (including two large ones in the basement) show how Madrid grew since the 16th century. All exhibits are explained in both English and Spanish. Entry is free.
    Museum of Illusions Madrid (Cine Ideal), Calle del Dr Cortezo, 8, 28012 Madrid, [x].
    Museum of Lazaro Galdiano (Museo de Lazaro Galdiano), Calle Serrano 122 (Metro: Gregorio Mariñon (lines 7 and 10)), ☎ +34 91 5616084, [x]. W-M: 10AM-4:30PM. Closed: Tu; Jan 1; Easter Thursday and Friday; May 2 and 3; Nov 1; Dec 6 and 25. This museum houses the stunning collection of Spanish entrepreneur José Lázaro Galdiano (1862-1947) and is considered to be one of the best private collections in Spain. You will find not only works by Goya, Velázquez, El Greco, and others, but also jewelry, furniture, sculpture, and ceramics. This excellent museum is not usually crowded and has well worth the price of admission.
    Museum of San Isidro the Origins of Madrid (Museo de San Isidro Los Origenes de Madrid), Plaza San Andres 2 (Metro: Latina (line 5)), ☎ +34 913 667 415, [x]. Mo: Closed Tu-Su: 9:30am-8pm. The museum has two parts. One part is dedicated to Saint Isidore the Laborer, while the other part is dedicated to the paleontology and archaeology of the Madrid region from prehistory to 1561 (when Philip II made Madrid the seat of the court). Most of the exhibits are explained in both Spanish and English languages. Entry is free.
    National Archeology Museum, Calle Serrano 13 (Metro: Serrano (line 4)), ☎ +34 91 5777912, [x]. Tu-Sa: 9:30AM-5PM, Su and Holidays 9:30AM-3PM. Closed: M; Jan 1 and 6; May 1 and 15; Dec 24, 25, and 31. (Holidays: Apr 5 and 6, May 2, Aug 15, Oct 12, Nov 1 and 9, Dec 6 and 8.. This museum houses an incredible collection of archaeological finds from the peninsula. It leaves the visitor with a sense of the chronology of civilization in Spain (Iberian, Phoenician, Greek, Roman, Visigoth, Arab, and into the modern age). The famous Dama de Elche, an Iberian (pre-Roman) fertility goddess statue, is in this museum. There are also a few pieces from ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia.
    National Museum of Anthropology (Museo Nacional de Antropologia), Alfonso XII, 68 (Metro: Atocha Renfe; Renfe Cercanias: Atocha), ☎ +34 91 530 64 18, [x]. Mo closed, Tu-Sa: 9:30am-8pm, Su: 10am-3pm. Small but interesting museum with artifacts and models from the indigenous people of Asia (mainly the Philippines, the former colony of Spain), Africa and America. The exhibits are described in Spanish, however, on each floor, there is a leaflet in English explaining all sections.
    National Museum of Natural Sciences (Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales), José Gutiérrez Abascal 2 (Metro: Gregorio Marañón, Nuevos Ministerios; Renfe Cercanias: Nuevos Ministerios), ☎ +34 91 411 1328, [x]. Contains a large collection of fossils and minerals, plus educational exhibits (some are described in English but many are in Spanish only). Has two parts open to visitors with separate entrances. The ticket is purchased at the main entrance. If you want to visit the other part you need to exit from the main entrance, turn left and follow the building until you reach the second entrance. Your ticket will be checked again there so don't lose it.
    National Museum of Science and Technology (Museo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia), C. del Pintor Velázquez, 5, 28100 Alcobendas, Madrid (Metro: Marques de la Valdavia (line 10)), ☎ +34 914 250 919, [x]. This is a museum dedicated to the history of science and technology, exhibiting scientific instruments and consumer products from the last few centuries. It also contains a large educational hall, explaining natural phenomena with practical hands-on exhibits (fun for children). Many exhibits are described in English and Spanish, although some sections have only a summary in English. Entry is free.
    Planetarium of Madrid (Planetario de Madrid), Avenida del Planetario 16 (Metro: Mendez Alvaro (line 6) or Arganzuela-Planetario (line 6)), ☎ +34 91 467 34 61, [x]. Mo: Closed, Tu-Fr: 9:30am-1:45pm and 5pm-7:45pm, Sa-Su: 11am-1:45pm and 5pm-8:45pm. Features several exhibits related to space exploration, two screens playing documentaries, an interactive area and, of course, the planetarium. Projections last 45 minutes each. Different play every day, so check their website. Please note that the planetarium projections and all exhibits are explained in Spanish only. Entry is free but the sessions in the planetarium are for a ticket..
    Railway Museum of Madrid (Museo de Ferrocarril de Madrid), Paseo de las Delicias 61 (Metro: Delicias (line 3); Renfe Cercanias: Delicias), ☎ +34 902 22 88 22, [x]. Mo closed, Tu-Th: 10am-3pm, Fr-Sa: 10am-8pm, Su: 10am-3pm. Museum with four railway tracks, exhibiting a large number of steam, diesel and electric locomotives used in Spain in the 19th and 20th century. Also on display are several model railways. Exhibits are described in Spanish only. 

Dama de Elche: Iberian (pre-Roman) fertility goddess statue

    San Antonio de La Florida Hermitage, Gta. San Antonio de la Florida, 4, 28008 Madrid, ☎ +34 915477937, [x]. This small church is famous for its murals, painted by Goya. It's also the mausoleum of the painter.
    San Fernando Fine Art Royal Academy, Calle Alcalá 13 (Metro: Sevilla or Banco de España (line 2)), ☎ +34 91 5240864, [x]. Tu-Fr: 9:30AM-7PM, Sa-M: 9:30-4:30PM. Highly impressive art collection with paintings, sculptures, drawings, and prints. Several Goya masterpieces.
    Sorolla Museum (Museo Sorolla), General Martínez Campos, 37 (Metro: Iglesia (line 1) or Rubén Darío (line 5); Bus lines 5, 7, 14, 16, 27, 40, 45, 61, 147 and 150), ☎ +34 91 3101584, [x]. Tu - Sa: 09:30-20:00; Su 10:00-15:00. This museum as the impressionist painter's house features by fine furniture and porcelain as well as his paintings. 

Parks

    Campo house (La Casa de Campo), Parque Casa de Campo, 28011 Madrid (Metro: Lago, Batan (line 10) or Casa de Campo (lines 5 and 10)), [x]. The park at the rear of the Palacio Real which used to belong to the Royal family. Much of the park has been taken to smaller activity parks such as the Zoo but in general, it's peaceful. From Moncloa, you can take a teleferico across the park.
    Caprice Park (Parque del Capricho), (Metro: El Capricho (line 5)). One of the most beautiful parks in Madrid. Built in 1797-1839 it has a strong Romanticism influence. Historic Garden, its lakes with swans and ducks, labyrinths, palaces, squares, and fountains create the park a lovely place.
    El Retiro Park, (Metro: Retiro (line 2), Ibiza (line 9) or Atocha (line 1)). The main park of Madrid, the perfect place to take a rest during a sunny day, or take part in the drum circles around the statue of Alphonso XII on summer evenings. There is a large boating lake where one can hire a boat. There is a monument to the victims of the Madrid 3/11 terrorist bombings, the Forest of the Absent, and the Crystal Palace, a large structure entirely made of glass. Sunday afternoons in summer are a treat in the park, where young hippies play bongos and dance.
    Faunia, Av. Comunidades, 28, 28032 Madrid (Metro: Valdebernardo (line 9)), ☎ +34 911547482, [x]. A different type of zoo, aiming to recreate the native habitats of the animals (e.g. the building of the nocturnal animals is dark inside, emulating night time and allowing visitors to see the animals during their active hours). Several shows, including marine mammals and birds of prey.
    Royal Botanical Garden (Real Jardín Botánico), (Metro: Atocha (line 1)), [x]. Opens at 10am, closing time varies by the season. 8-hectare garden is located next to the Prado Museum and Retiro Park.
    Temple of Debod (Templo de Debod), Paseo del Pintor Rosales 2 (Metro: Plaza de España (lines 3 and 10)), ☎ +34 91 765108, [x]. Tu-F 10am–2pm and 6pm-8pm, Sa-Su 10am–2pm, closed on Mondays and holidays. An Egyptian temple, located in one of Madrid′s most beautiful parks. Near the Royal Palace and Plaza de España, it was a present given by Egypt to Spain for its role in saving the temple of Abu Simbel from the floodwaters of Lake Nasser following the construction of the Aswan Dam in southern Egypt. A great place to watch the sunset. Free.
    West Park Rose Garden (Rosaleda del Parque del Oeste), Calle Rosaleda 2 (Metro: Principe Pio (lines 6 and 10)), [x]. 10am-7pm. The rose garden of Madrid, located in the same park as the Templo de Debod. If you like roses and you are in Madrid when they flower, definitely worth a visit. The garden holds an international competition yearly. Entry is free.
    Zoo Aquarium Madrid, Parque Casa de Campo, 28011 Madrid (Metro: Casa de Campo (lines 5 and 10); Bus line 33), ☎ +34 911547479, [x]. See the Pandas. Pet the Lemurs. Watch the Dolphin show. Enjoy the Bird show. 

Do

There are a number of free English-language periodicals that you will find in bars and restaurants that are a great source of event information. Aimed at the 20-35-year-old crowd, Life Madrid has listings for concerts, exhibitions, bars, restaurants, parties, and other events happening in Madrid as well as articles about living in the city. In NocheMAD [http://www.nochemad.com you will also find a very extensive agenda with concerts, parties and theatre play in Madrid. Check the websites for current Madrid events[15].

    Circle of Fine Arts Cultural center (Circulo de Bellas Artes), Calle Marqués de Casa Riera 2 (Metro: Banco de España), ☎ +34 91 5225092, [x]. A non-profit cultural center located a short walk from Sol, the CBA offers up a wide variety of events and shows including film, music, art displays, dance, theater and more. See the website (in Spanish) for a list of activities.
    Cookly Paella Cooking Class with Market Tour, Calle de Moratin, 11, 28014 Madrid (at Cooking Point Madrid), ☎ +34 910 115 154 (info@cookingpoint.es), [x]. Spending 4 hours with a local chef shopping, cooking and enjoying Spanish traditional dishes. This class has a children's price for those who come with a family.
    Escape Room (Madrid Coco Room), C. de Moratines, 18, 28005 Madrid, ☎ +34 696079392, [x]. Escape Room from Monday to Sunday for adults and children to get a unique experience.
    Madrid Amusement Park (Parque de Atracciones de Madrid), Casa de Campo, s/n, 28011 Madrid, ☎ +34 912000795, [x]. A complete set of various attractions.
    VR Virtual Recall Park & Academy, Av. de Madrid, 128, Naves 15 y 16, 28500 Arganda del Rey, Madrid, ☎ +34 914669840, [x]. Discover a virtual world. 

Classic & opera

    Auditorium 400 in Reina Sofía National Art Museum (Auditorio 400, Museo Centro de Arte Reina Sofia), Rda. de Atocha, 2, 28012 Madrid, [x]. The main venue for contemporary music.
    Foundation Joan March Auditorium, Calle de Castelló, 77, 28006 Madrid, ☎ +34914354240, [x]. Concerts, conferences, expositions.
    Getafe Music Band (Banda de Música de Getafe), Av. de las Ciudades, 37, 28903 Getafe, Madrid, ☎ +34 644848442, [x].
    Monumental Theater Performing arts (Teatro Monumental), C. de Atocha, 65, 28012 Madrid, ☎ +34 914291281, [x]. Performances of Orquesta de Radio Televisión Española every Th and F.
    National Music Auditorium (Auditorio Nacional de Música), C. del Príncipe de Vergara, 146, 28002 Madrid, ☎ +34 913370140, [x]. The Auditorium is also the main concert venue for the symphonic concerts of the Community of Madrid Orchestra and the Madrid symphony Orchestra and the main venue for touring classical artists and orchestras.
    Perform In Spain, Paseo Infanta Isabel, 21 5ºC, 28014 Madrid, ☎ +34 915515294, [x].
    Royal Theatre (Teatro Real), Plaza de Oriente (Metro: Opera), [x]. The main opera theatre in Madrid.
    Zarzuela Performing arts theater (Teatro de la Zarzuela), C. de Jovellanos 4, 28014 Madrid, ☎ +34 915245400, [x]. The Spanish version of the Operetta (Zarzuela) is performed here. 

Concerts

    Gruta 77, Calle Cuclillo 6 (Metro: Oporto), ☎ +34 91 4712370, [x]. Concerts everyday; pop, rock, punk.
    La Riviera, Paseo Bajo de la Virgen (Metro: Puerta del Angel or Principe Pío), ☎ +34 91 3652415, [x]. Another large venue for touring rock and pop bands. 

Events

    La Paloma Festival, [x]. Madrid's most castizo (traditional Madrid) festival on the days leading up to August 15th. A huge street party in the La Latina neighborhood with bars setting up stalls outside their areas and booming music. Food stalls along the Carrera de San Francisco.
    La Transhumancia, [x]. Annual event during which the center of Madrid is free of cars and instead of it is filled by shepherds exercising their ancient right to drive sheep and livestock through the city.
    Mad Cool Festival, [x]. Techno and electronic music festival occurring in September. 

Madrid Gay Pride 2011

    Madrid Gay Pride, [x]. Annual event is held between the last week of June and the first of July, with the crowds of people on the streets from all across the world. It begins as a weekend party but later turns into a full week extravaganza. 

Flamenco Shows

    Cardamomo Flamenco Show (Tablao Flamenco Cardamomo), Echegaray 15, [x]. Authentic Flamenco show in the center of Madrid, one of the gratest tablaos flamencos all over Spain, typical Spanish food during the performance.
    Corral of the Moreria (Corral de la Moreria), C. de la Moreria, 17, 28005 Madrid, ☎ +34 913651137, [x]. One of the most famous flamenco tablaos in the world. It′s right in the heart of the city, and you can enjoy a full-fledged Spanish meal while you watch performances by renowned international flamenco music and dance artists.
    Flamenco Las Tablas, Plaza España 9 (Walk from Plaza España metro), ☎ +34 915 420 520 (info@lastablasmadrid.com), [x]. A very popular Tablao located near the Plaza España metro station. The package consisting of a Flamenco show (at 9 or 10pm) with a candle-lit dinner and a glass of Sangria wine is truly a treat.
    Patas Casa, Calle de los Cañizares nº10, Madrid 28012 (About 10 blocks west of Museo del Prado), ☎ +34 91 369 04 96 (info@casapatas.com), [x]. Shows at 22:30 Monday-Thursday, 21:00 and 24:00 Friday-Saturday. An excellent venue as all tables and seats have a good view of the stage. Optional dinner is before the show and guarantees a good seat near the stage. Attention is paid to flamenco as a cultural art form, not just as a floor show. 

Movies and film

There are a number of cinemas offering American and British films in English (along with films in other languages). These original films are denoted in the listings by a designation of "V.O." which stands for versión original. Cinemas in Madrid will sometimes have días del espectador (viewer days) with cheaper ticket prices, usually on Mondays or Wednesdays.

    Berlanga room (Sala Berlanga), C. de Andrés Mellado, 53, 28015 Madrid, ☎ +34 914550878, [x].
    Cine Doré, la Filmoteca Española, Calle Santa Isabel 3 (metro: Anton Martín), ☎ +34 91 3691125.
    Cines Golem Alphaville, Calle Martin de los Heros 14 (metro: Plaza de España), ☎ +34 91 5593836, [x].
    Kinepolis, C/ Edgar Neville s/n, Ciudad de la Imagen, Pozuelo de Alarcon (metro ligero: Ciudad del Cine (ML3)), [x]. Outside the city, in the suburb of Pozuelo de Alarcon. When inaugurated, it was the largest megaplex in the world by a number of seats. Has 25 screens. Typically on weekends, only the new releases are offered in their original version, however, Tuesday is "V.O. Day" when all movies are offered in their original version.
    mk2 Ice Palace, Calle Silvano 77 (metro: Canillas), ☎ +34 91 4061785, [x]. This cinema is located in a shopping mall known for its ice-skating ring. It is a great place where teenagers can hang out since the mall also has restaurants, bars, and shops.
    Renoir Cines Princesa, Calle Princesa 3 (metro: Plaza de España), ☎ +34 91 5414100, [x].
    Renoir Plaza de España, Calle Martín de los Heroes 12 (Metro: Plaza de España), ☎ +34 91 5414100, [x].
    Renoir Retiro, Calle Narvaez 42 (metro: Ibiza), ☎ +34 91 5414100, [x].
    Yelmo Cines Ideal, Doctor Cortezo 6 (metro: Sol), ☎ +34 91 3692518, [x]. Probably the best known V.O. theater in Madrid, it offers the largest selection of movies and is only a short walk from Sol. 

Sports
Basketball

    Estudiantes, [x]. Club Baloncesto Estudiantes S.A.D is a basketball team and was founded in 1948 as a student club.
    Real Madrid, [x]. Famous Basketball team. 

Football

Four teams from Madrid play in La Liga (Spain's premier division). The matches between Real Madrid and Atlético de Madrid are known as "El Derbi Madrileño" (English: Madrid Derby).

    Atlético de Madrid, [x]. Plays games in the Wanda Metropolitano stadium. The club is one of the most successful in Spanish League history, having won both La Liga and the Copa del Rey on ten occasions, including a double in 1996. They also won the European Cup Winners Cup in 1962, were European Cup runners-up in 1974 and 2014, Intercontinental Cup winners in 1975, and more recently won the UEFA Europa League in 2010, 2012, 2017, and the European SuperCup in 2010, and 2012.
    Club Deportivo Leganés, S.A.D, [x]. Plays games at Estadio Municipal de Butarque.
    Getafe Club de Fútbol, [x]. Plays games at Coliseum Alfonso Pérez in Getafe, one of the dormitory cities of Madrid.
    Real Madrid, [x]. For football fanatics, a trip to the Santiago Bernabeu, the home of local club Real Madrid is not to be missed. Real Madrid is the most successful football club in Spain and Europe, having been crowned Spanish champions a record 32 times and European champions a record 13 times. Their biggest rivals by far are FC Barcelona, with which it contests matches known popularly as El Clásico at least twice a year. The rivalry between the two sides is by far the biggest in Spain and one of the most intense in the world and stems from the longstanding traditional rivalry between the Spanish and Catalan-speaking parts of Spain. As such, tickets for such matches often sell out very quickly. In case you arrive in Madrid on non-match periods, you can take a self-guided tour of the Santiago Bernabeu Stadium. It includes tours around the field, the dressing rooms, the Press Room, and the Real Madrid Museum where the trophies and other memorabilia are kept. However, a few days before a match, the chances are you will not be able to take the full tour, but only a part of it, with at least the Real Madrid Museum, at a reduced price. 

Other sport

    Bullfighting (Las Ventas Bullring), (Metro: Ventas), [x]. The birthplace of bullfighting. Unless you find this spectacle unpleasant, this is a must-see if you visit Madrid during the bullfighting season (May, during San Isidro). Tickets may nevertheless be expensive and hard to get for the more important corridas. Anyway, it usually is used as a venue for shows and concerts. You can also visit the bullring and get to discover every corner and history of this emblematic building with Las Ventas Tour. Open every day from 10:00 am until 6:00 pm. For more information visit [2].
    Go-kart track (Carlos Sainz Karting Madrid), C. de Sepúlveda, 3, 28011 Madrid, ☎ +34 916407474, [x].
    Golf Park, Av. de Europa, 10, 28108 Alcobendas, Madrid, ☎ +34 916614444, [x].
    Madrid Tennis Master 1000, Camino de Perales (Metro: San Fermin - Orcasur; Bus numbers 23 - 78 - 123), [x]. Held in mid-May at La Caja Mágica.
    Rock climbing (Zone Boulder Madrid), C. de Azcona, 44, 28028 Madrid, ☎ +34 670264070, [x]. 

Tours

    Bike Spain Tours, Pl. de la Villa, 1, 28005 Madrid, ☎ +34 915590653, [x]. Bicycle rental and tours
    Free Madrid walking tour, [x]. Do not forget to inquire about this type of tours in every major city.
    Hot Air Balloon Flight (Vuelos en Globo Madrid EoloFLY), C. de Embajadores, 161, 3ºH, 28045 Madrid, ☎ +34 677996404, [x].
    Madrid City Tour, C. de Felipe IV, s/n, 28014 Madrid, ☎ +34 913692732, [x]. The Madrid City Tour Hop on/ Hop off Buses cost EUR 21 for 1 day and EUR 25 for two days (adults). For families with 2 adults and 2 kids, it costs EUR 53 for 1 day. Stops on Route 1 include Museo Del Prado, Puerta De Alcala, Barrio De Salamanca, Plaza De Colon, Plaza De Cibeles, Gran Via 14, Gran Via 30, Gran Via 54, Plaza De Espana, Templo De Debod, Teatro Real, Palacio Real, Puerta De Toledo, San Francisco El Grande, Cathedral De La Almudena, Plaza Mayor, Puerta Del Sol, Circulo De Bellas Artes, Museo Thyssen, Museo Reina Sofia, Jardin Botanico, Museo Del Prado. Stops on Route 2 include Plaza De Neptuno, Plaza De Cibeles, Plaza De Colon, Museo De Esculturas, Museo De Ciencias Naturales, Nuevos Ministerios, Santiago Bernabeu, Consejo Superior Investigaciones Cientificas, Museo Lazaro Galdiano, Serrano 61, Serrano 66, Museo Arqueologico, Puerta De Alcala, Alcala 17, Puerta Del Sol, Plaza De Las Cortes, Plaza De Neptuno.
    Madrid Day Tours, Carrera de S. Jerónimo, 15, 28014 Madrid, ☎ +34 911230105, [x].
    Medieval Madrid tour, ☎ +34 649 936 222, [x]. A special time in Madrid visiting the land of castles in Castile and getting to know some of the layers of the population of the time.
    Tapas Tour in Madrid (Wonder Tours Madrid), Calle de Santiago, 18, 28013 Madrid, ☎ +34 910750163, [x]. Other tours by E-bike, segway, Tuk-tuk. 

Learn

If you want to go to Madrid to learn Spanish, there are several private language schools that offer Spanish courses for foreigners. Another option is to take a Spanish course at university.

    AIL Madrid, Calle de Núñez de Balboa, 17 28001, ☎ +34 917 25 63 50 (info@ailmadrid.com), [x]. AIL Madrid is an Instituto Cervantes - accredited Spanish Language School that offers a wide range of Spanish classes for adult students of all ages. 16 different Spanish courses and free 10 hours a week/ 2 hours a day of cultural activities. Average class size 6 persons.
    Cambio Idiomas, Calle Orense, 20 (Nuevos Ministerios), ☎ +34 915567804, [x]. Cambio Idiomas is a very communicative language academy in the business center of Madrid, specialized in Spanish courses for ex-pats. Also, there are a number of courses in different languages, and levels, and with different objectives.
    Complutense University of Madrid, [x]. It offers Spanish courses for foreigners that take place in the faculty of Philology and Letters.
    Cronopios Idiomas, Calle Espalter, 12, Atocha, ☎ +34 915 222 014, [x]. Located in the heart of Madrid. Cronopios Idiomas is a cooperative run by the teachers at the center, offering personalized attention and high-quality teaching. The Spanish as a foreign language courses are based on a communicative approach to make learning a language relaxed, fun, and effective. Other services offered include cultural workshops and guided tours, for which the school works with a historian and an art expert, as well as finding accommodation for students.
    Don Quijote, (Calle Duque de Liria, 6 28015), [x]. Great school where you can take 4-6 hours of courses per day. All courses including beginner courses are taught entirely in Spanish.
    Eureka Madrid, Calle del Arenal, 26 - 3º D, 28013 Madrid, ☎ +34 915 488 640 (eureka@eurekamadrid.com, fax: +34 915 482 580), [x]. Academia Eureka is a Spanish language school located in the heart of Madrid near Puerta del Sol. The school's sole objective is teaching Spanish as a foreign language. Academia Eureka is accredited by the Instituto Cervantes and has been offering Spanish classes since 1988. The school offers optional housing: on-site or with a Spanish family and provides after-school activities and excursions. Classes start on Monday and all 6 levels (A1, A2, B1, B2, C1, and C2) are offered. Class sizes are small with a maximum of 8 students per class.
    Inhispania, (Calle Marqués de Valdeiglesias, 3 28004), ☎ +34 91 521 22 31 (info@inhispania.com), [x]. Inhispania is specialized in a teaching Spanish language and culture. It is an Accredited School by the Instituto Cervantes with an excellent location near to Gran Vía offering intensive and regular programs, in smalls groups, for all levels and during the whole year. The school also organizes after-school actitivies and offers an optional accommodation service.
    La Aventura Española, Calle Montesa,35 (dcha)2º dcha, ☎ +34 912 196 991 (info@laemadrid.com), [x]. Learn Spanish while having fun in Madrid. La Aventura Española is an Instituto Cervantes accredited school that offers a wide range of Spanish courses for all needs and all levels.
    Linguaschools Madrid, [x]. Offers Spanish courses for foreigners all year round. Students with previous knowledge can start any Monday. For absolute beginners, there are fixed start dates.
    Tilde-Spanish School for Adults, Calle Luis Vélez de Guevara, 8. Madrid 28012 (Barrio de Las Letras), ☎ +34 915228508 (escuela@tildemadrid.es), [x]. Tilde Madrid is an Instituto Cervantes is accredited Spanish Language School. The center is specialized in teaching the Spanish language to adults, professionals, and experienced travelers of all nationalities. Maximum class size 4 persons. New courses start every Monday. 

Buy

    Major credit cards and foreign bank cards are accepted in most stores but be aware that it is common practice to be asked for photo ID ("D.N.I."). If asked for your DNI present your passport, residency permit or foreign ID card. Basically, anything with your photo and name on it will be accepted by most shopkeepers. The signatures on credit cards are usually not checked.

    Boteria Julio Rodriguez, Calle Aguila 12, [x]. A boteria where traditional Spanish wine botas (leather bags or sacks for wine) are made as well as sold. Various sizes are available. These botas are the traditional rubber lining (as opposed to rubber/latex lined ones).
    Casa Vega, 57 Calle Toledo, [x]. A traditional shop founded in 1860 selling cord (jute products), espadrilles, alpargatas (rope soled shoes), leather belts, backpacks, dog leashes, fabric saddle bags, etc. 

Shopping Districts

    In addition to the shopping areas below, there are also a great number of H&M, Zara, Mango, and Blanco stores all over Madrid, with high fashion clothes and accessories at a low prices.

    Calle Toledo, south of Plaza Mayor— A number of traditional shops selling Spanish rope soled shoes (espadrilles or alpargatas), jute products, and leather can be found here.
    Chueca and Fuencarral Street Area— This part of the city used to be an abandoned and marginal area. However recently, it has quickly turned into the most avant-garde and modern part of Madrid. Today it is an example of modernity, a paradise for entertainment where everything is possible. The streets are filled with restaurants, alternative cafés and shops, a good example is the Market of Fuencarral (Mercado de Fuencarral, in Spanish) a novel shopping center concept. Apart from the purely commercial, this area proposes a wide range of gastronomy and party clubs by night in the weekends.
    Sol-Salamanca districts. The most convenient area for tourists is around Calle de Preciados, between Sol and Gran Vía, home to the El Corte Inglés department store, and high-street names like Zara, Gran Vía 32, H&M, Sephora, Pimkie. The smartest shopping district is Salamanca northeast of the center, around Calle Serrano. Top designer names like Chanel, Versace, Hermès, Hugo Boss, Louis Vuitton, Giorgio Armani, Dolce e Gabbana, and Hugo Boss, including the fluid fabrics and elegant cuts of Spanish designer Adolfo Domínguez, are located on Calle Ortega y Gasset. Head for Calle Serrano for Purificación García, Roberto Verino, Ermenegildo Zegna, Loewe, Carolina Herrera, Manolo Blanik, Cartier, and Yves Saint Laurent. Prada is on Goya street, and on Jorge Juan St you can find even more luxury shops.

Markets

    Cuesta de Moyano, C. Claudio Moyano, 19, 28014 Madrid (near Museo del Prado), [x]. A quaint outdoor book market
    El Mercado de San Miguel, San Miguel Plaza (Close to the west corner of Plaza Mayor), ☎ +34 915424936. Sets the ambiance of a traditional market, with the advantages of the new times. It has an Iron and Glass Structure from the 20th Century. Quite upscale with beautiful displays of the food with high prices to match.
    El Rastro (Rastro de Madrid), Calle de la Ribera de Curtidores, 15, 28005 Madrid (Metro: La Latina). only open on Sunday mornings. Madrid's largest flea market, featuring rows upon rows of private vendors selling a variety of homemade bads, and a plethora of live entertainment. It is very important to note that the Rastro is notorious for having an abundance of pickpockets, so watch your handbag closely and do not bring along valuables. 

Shopping Outlets

    Las Rozas Village Shopping mall, Calle Juan Ramón Jimenez 3, Las Rozas, ☎ +34 916 404 900, [x]. M-F 11AM-9PM, Sa 11AM-10PM, Su 11AM-9PM. Chic Outlet Shopping in the suburbs of Madrid with villa-like shops. It is a part of the Chic Outlet Shopping Villages in Europe which has other villa-like outlets in Paris, Barcelona, Dublin, London, Milan, Brussels, Frankfurt, and Munich. It offers up to 60% off on over 100 luxury brands such as Bally, Burberry, Hugo Boss Man and Woman, Pepe Jeans, Loewe, Desigual, Camper, Tommy Hilfiger, and Versace. In Las Rozas Village you can also find some coffee places like Starbucks and a few bars. It takes around 40 minutes to get there by car from the center of Madrid. A fantastic experience for a warm Sunday afternoon. 

Eat
Cuisine

Dishes popular throughout Spain are also widely served in Madrid.

In addition, Madrid has a number of "typical" dishes:
Callos a La Madrileña

    Callos a la Madrileña - A hot pot of spicy beef tripe similar to those found in Turkey and the Balkans.
    Cocido Madrileño - Chickpea stew with meat and vegetables. The particularity of this stew is the way it is served. The soup, chickpeas and meat are served and eaten separately.
    Gallinejas and Entresijos - Portions from different parts of lamb fried in its fat. Very traditional and typical of Madrid city.
    Oreja de Cerdo - Pigs ears, fried with garlic. This popular dish is widely eaten throughout central Spain.
    Sopa de Ajo - Garlic soup is a rich oily soup that generally includes paprika, grated Spanish ham, fried bread, and a poached egg. A variation of this soup is known as Sopa Castellana.

It is ironic that Madrid, located right in the center of Spain has higher-quality seafood than most coastal regions. This quality comes at a price, and most Spaniards only occasionally shell out for a mariscada (Spanish for "seafood feast"). So, tasting Madrid's seafood can be an experience that will be worth the cost for the visitor.

Meat and meat products (Jamon Iberico, morcilla, chorizo, etc.) are of generally a very high quality in Spain and particularly in Madrid.
Restaurants

Many of the restaurants and cervecerías (breweries) in the Sol and Plaza Mayor area have "generic" poster board advertisements on the sidewalks with pictures advertising various paella dishes. These paellas are usually of bad quality and should be avoided. If you are looking for good, authentic Spanish paella, it is usually best to find a more expensive, "sit-down" type of restaurant that offers a variety of paella dishes.

A much better option is the La Latina neighborhood just south of Plaza Mayor, especially along Cava Baja street. To enjoy a gastronomic tour of this area you can join the Old Madrid Tapas & Wine Tour [16]. There are also a number of deli-like shops along Calle Arenal that offer food para llevar (for takeaway).

At bars, one generally orders various sized plates, a ración meaning a full dish, a media ración a half dish or a smaller version which would be a tapa, a pinxto or a pincho.

The Spaniards don't eat lunch until 2 or 3 pm, and dinner doesn't start until 9 or 10 pm. As a rule of thumb, restaurants serve lunch from 1PM (earlier in touristic zones) until 3:30PM, then close and reopen for dinner at 8:00PM, serving until 11:00PM. This schedule is usually for restaurants since the bars and "mesones" are usually open all day long offering a wide variety of "tapas" and "bocadillos"(rolls) for a low price. If you're really desperate, the standard bunch of fast food chains does stay open throughout the day.
Budget

    Home Burger, 2 locations: Malasaña District and Plaza de la Luna(Gran Via), [x]. The place for serious hamburgers. Americans will feel at home.
    Freiduria Gallinejas restaurant, C. de Ramírez Tomé, 32, 28038 Madrid, ☎ +34 913037161. 11:00-23:00. Another classic tapas bar in Madrid. Not for conservative stomachs. Their most popular tapas are two of the most typical and traditional dishes in Madrid: Gallinejas and Entresijos. A treat for adventurous palates and lamb lovers. 

Museo del Jamon

    Museo del Jamon Tapas restaurant, Several locations, ☎ +34 915314550, [x]. Offers deli takeout service as well as tapas and raciónes at reasonable prices. They offer ham sandwiches and a "picnic" lunch consisting of a said ham sandwich, fresh fruit, and a drink. 

Mid-range

    Alhambra Andalusian restaurant, Calle de Victoria 9 (Metro: Sevilla), ☎ +34 91 5210708. This is a good place to drop by on a hot afternoon to enjoy a cold beer and some Andalusian tapas. Sample the sausages and cheeses.
    Chocolatería San Ginés, Calle de Pasadizo De San Ginés 5 (metro: Sol), ☎ +34 91 3656546, [x]. Specializing in chocolate con churros, this Madrid fixture is open 24 hours a day. The perfect place to top off a night on the town. Also offers the usual assortment of coffees and teas.
    El Espejo Nouveau Restaurant, enfrente de la Biblioteca Nacional, Paseo de Recoletos 31 A 100 metros de la, Pl. de Colón, 28004 Madrid (Metro: Colon), ☎ +34 691141726, [x].
    Inti de Oro Cortes Peruvian restaurant, Calle de Ventura de la Vega 12 (metro: Sevilla), ☎ +34 91 4296703, [x]. For something different, try this great Peruvian restaurant a short walk from Sol. Be sure to order some of their ceviche and try the Pisco Sour cocktail.
    La Barraca Restaurant, Calle Reina 29, 28004 Madrid, ☎ +34 91 532 71 54, [x]. Open every day from 13:30. Recommended for paella if you are looking for a more authentic experience.
    La Bola, Calle de la Bola 5 (Metro: Opera), ☎ +34 915 476 930, [x].
    La Mucca de Pez restaurant, Pl. de Carlos Cambronero, 4, 28004 Madrid (Metro: Noviciado), ☎ +34 915210000, [x]. Nice designer restaurant popular within the 20s-30s crowd. Good music, cool people, even better food and cocktails. The kitchen opens in the afternoon.
    La Rollerie, Atocha 20 (Metro: Astón Martín), ☎ +34 914 20 46 75, [x]. Pleasant, a spacious, yet homely eatery offering outstanding brunch sets and fresh, quality food at a reasonable price. The clean, bright premises, ambient music, airy furniture, and attentive, but unobtrusive crew complete the meal, providing a welcome respite from the dusty heat of the inner city.
    Los Huevos de Lucio Spanish restaurant, Calle Cava Baja, 32, 28005, ☎ +34 913662984, [x]. M-Su 13:00-16:00 20:30-00:00. This restaurant is the product of the sons of founding members of Casa Lucio, just opposite and down the street, and no doubt La Latina's most traditional restaurant. It has a much more explorative, modern menu that serves up traditional ingredients in contemporary ways with excellent results. You can't book but the entrance bar can start you off with drinks and anything off the menu while you wait for seating upstairs or below (upstairs is worth the wait). Don't miss their signature dish of scrambled eggs with sausage, veggies or jamon but also try the artchokes with foie or the shredded quail salad.
    Malacatin Madrilian restaurant, Calle Ruda 5, ☎ +34 913655241, [x]. Su-Tu 11:00-18:00, W-Sa 11:00-23:00. Serves typical Madrid cuisine. Try there Cocido madrileño, a substantial dish prepared with meat and vegetables.
    Samm restaurant, Calle de Carlos Caamaño 3 (Metro: Pio XII), ☎ +34 913453074, [x]. Best paella in Madrid, but only if you bring more than two people by order of the proprietor. Frequented mainly by locals.
    Tasca La Farmacia restaurant, Calle de Diego de León, 9, 28006 Madrid (another branch on C. del Poeta Joan Maragall, 19), ☎ +34 915648652, [x]. M-Sa 13:00-16:00 20:30-00:00. Tasca la Farmacia is a classic Basque restaurant of the capital. The perfect spot to enjoy some of the best "pintxos" (Basque tapas) with friends accompanied by a cold beer or taste the house specialty, cod. A fish that the chef prepares in various different ways: croquettes, stewed, scrambled, deep fried. All of them are of excellent quality and presentation. Located in the mythical district of Tetuan, Tasca la Farmacia is a must for those wanting to experience authentic Basque cuisine inside the city of Madrid.
    Valencia House Mediterranean restaurant (Casa de Valencia), Paseo Pintor Rosales 58, ☎ +34 915441747, [x]. 

Splurge

    Botín, Calle Cuchilleros 17 (Metro: La Latina), ☎ +34 913664217, [x]. Opened in 1725, Botín is listed in the Guinness Book of Records as the oldest operating restaurant in the world. Once a favorite of Ernest Hemingway, the menu still delights with specialties including roast suckling pig (cochinillo) and roast lamb (cordero).
    DiverXO, NH Eurobuilding, C. del Padre Damián, 23, 28036 Madrid, ☎ +34 915700766, [x]. M-Sa 14:00-16:00 21:00-23:30. David Muñoz, chef and owner of DiverXO, advocates a modern and unique fusion cuisine combining only the best of both Mediterranean and Asian products. With over 10 years of experience, each course that David prepares is a world of flavors and textures, one surprise after another that is well worth its 3 Michelin stars. DiverXO also has an original personality, creating service guidelines away from the classic, exploiting the most positive features of its team. If you want a unique fusion dining experience do not miss the opportunity to visit DiverXO. 30 days in advance booking is necessary.
    Kabuki Japanese restaurant, av. Presidente Carmona 2 28020, ☎ +34 914176415, [x]. M-F 13:30-16:30 20:30-23:30 Sat 13:30-16:30. Japanese-iberian cuisine. The chef and part of the staff regularly spend months in Japan perfecting their technique. Most critics agree they offer the best sushi in Europe.
    L’Hardy, Carrera San Jerónimo, 8 28014, ☎ +34 915213385, [x]. M-Su 08:00-23:00. This restaurant and catering establishment is a historic and iconic Madrid gourmet institute. Right beside Puerta del Sol people dash by without realizing that some of Madrid's finest traditional Spanish cuisine are being served in the lavishly decorated restaurant upstairs. Since 1839 L’Hardy has been serving excellent quality food to the delight of critics.
    La Trainera, Calle de Lagasca 60 (metro: Velázquez or Serrano), ☎ +34 91 5768035, [x]. open everyday 12:30-01:00. A decoration of an eminently marine environment for decades. Trainera is an excellent but somewhat pricey restaurant serving strictly fresh seafood dishes. They have a great wine selection and the waiters can recommend different vintages that will complement the food. Try the carabineros (giant scarlet shrimp) or the rodaballo (turbot). Usually closed in August.
    Lucio Casa, Calle de Cava Baja 35 (Metro: La Latina), ☎ +34 91 3653253, [x]. open everyday 13:00-16:00. Pricey but worth it, the Spanish Royal family sometimes entertain guests here and you may run into a few sports figures and movie stars. You should definitely book ahead on the weekends, and reservations are recommended even for the weekdays. Known for their cocido, their roasts, and their huevos rotos.
    Nemesio Casa Seafood restaurant, Paseo de la Castellana 260, ☎ +34 913238410, [x].
    Paco Roncero restaurant, Alcalá 15 28014, ☎ +34 915321275, [x]. M-F 13:30-15:15 21:00-23:00 Sat 21:00-23:00. It is one of Madrid’s most innovative restaurants.
    Ramón Freixa Madrid restaurant, Claudio Coello 67 28001, ☎ +34 917818262, [x]. M-Sa 13:30-15:30 21:00-23:00. Named after the chef and owner, Ramon Freixa, and winner of 2 Michelin stars, this restaurant is one of the most elegant eating spots of the city. He also owns one of Catalunya’s finest restaurants, Racó de Freixa, another winner of the prestigious Michelin award. Ramon Freixa offers a modern minimalist space (35 seats and a private room) with spacious tables and a menu that does justice to its fame. Among his specialties are the Big Duck (duck burger, green mustard ice cream, idiazabal cheese, and bread), Bacalao al estilo Freixa (Freixa-style cod), and the famous Bogavante en micro menú (Lobster in the micro menu). All of which definitely earn the 2 Michelin stars awarded.
    Zalacain restaurant, Álvarez de Baena 4, 28006, ☎ +34 911401414, [x]. M-F 13:15-16:00 21:00-00:00 Sa 21:00-00:00=. Opened in 1973 on the street of Alvarez de Baena, Zalacaín is a classic for fine Spanish cuisine and winner of a Michelin Star. A restaurant specializing in dishes prepared with the best products of the season, combining them with the best wines from its extensive menu. It has a team of professionals with over 32 years of experience, is always attentive to any questions, and gives suggestions to the most undecided. Do not miss their classic dishes such as the mushroom and foie lasagna and the apple strudel. A suit and tie are a must for men. 

Drink
Cafes

    Barbieri Café, Calle Ave Maria 45 (Metro: Lavapies), ☎ +34 917246572, [x]. Slightly scruffy cafe draws an avante garde crowd at night.
    Central Café, Plaza del Angel 10 (Metro: Sol), ☎ +34 913694143, [x]. Café by day, live jazz music at night. 

Café Commercial Madrid

    Commercial Cafe, Gta. de Bilbao, 7, 28004 Madrid (Metro: Bilbao), ☎ +34 910882525, [x]. opened in the 1880´s, this is the oldest cafe in Madrid. Has been run by the same family since the early 1900's. There´s a modern internet cafe upstairs, but the downstairs remains traditional.
    de Oriente Café, Plaza Oriente 2 (Metro: Opera), ☎ +34 915413974, [x]. Overlooks the Plaza Oriente and faces Palacio Real. Outdoor tables in summer, cozy indoor rooms in the cold months. Basement banquet room with a glass floor over ancient remains. Excellent food. 

El Tigre tapas bar

    El Tigre, Calle de los Infantas 30 (Metro: Gran Vía / Chueca), [x]. Probably the most well-known tapas bar in Madrid, a must do. Don't get frightened by how crowded the bar is and go in anyway. This is one of the most lively places in the city! Get beers, big glasses of wine, or "un mini de mojito" and get free big plates of tapas every time you order.
    Gijón Café, Paseo Recoletos 21 (Metro: Banco de España or Colon), ☎ +34 915215425, [x]. everyday 09:00-01:00. A historic literary cafe. The outdoor terrace is nice in the summer.
    La Mallorquina, Puerta del Sol 8, Mayor, 2 (Metro: Sol), ☎ +34 91521120, [x]. everyday 08:30-21:00. Famous for its pastries. The peaceful upstairs room where you can linger undisturbed over your café con leche and napolitana de chocolate (chocolate croissant).
    La Pecera del Círculo de Bellas Artes, Calle Alcala 42 (Metro: Banco de Espana), [x]. M-Th 08:00-01:00, F-Sa 08:00-15:00, Su 08:00-12:00. A soaring hall on the ground floor of Madrid´s art center combines atmosphere, excellent food, and good coffee at reasonable prices. A wonderful place for lunch not far from Madrid´s shopping or museums. 

Bars

Nightlife starts later in Madrid, with most people heading to the bars at 10-11PM.

    𝟏𝟎𝟎 𝐌𝐨𝐧𝐭𝐚𝐝𝐢𝐭𝐨𝐬, Several locations, [x]. Home to the famous 100 "montaditos" (small sandwiches), you'll find several branches dotted around the city. Great place to go for a cheap drink with a bite to eat. Special offers on Wednesdays and Sundays.
    Areia, Calle Horteleza 96 (Metro: Chueca), ☎ +34 913100307, [x]. Very cool chill out bar decorated with deep colors in a Moroccan style. Dark and inviting. The floor is covered in sand giving a beach-like vibe. The seating includes cushions on the floor, traditional tables, and chairs, or if you’re lucky, grab the four-poster bed at the back.
    Dubliners, Espoz y Mina, 7 (''Metro: Sol''), ☎ +34 915327956, [x]. An Irish bar in the center of Madrid near Puerta del Sol. The bar has televisions and is one of the places where sport can be watched.
    Jaen 3 Bar, Calle Poitiers 3 (metro: Coslada Estadio Olimpico), ☎ +34 91247102. An excellent bar de tapas and restaurant. A nice place to enjoy Spanish food and lifestyle without spending too much. Being located just outside central Madrid, it's far from being a tourist trap and you can enjoy good food and true "raciones" (portions). The pleasant owners are very willing to share stories about Madrid and Spain more generally. In summer time it has a superb terrace, within a stone's throw of the Olympic Stadium.
    La Casa del Abuelo, Calle de Victoria 12 (metro: Sevilla), ☎ +34 91 5212319, [x]. A Madrid landmark in operation for over 100 years, this bar attracts a standing room only crowd on the weekends. They mainly serve shrimp-based tapas dishes so if you're not into shellfish it may be advisable to steer clear. Order a plate of garlic shrimp and accompany it with their house wine.
    La Via Lactea, Calle de Velarde 18, Malasaña (Metro: Tribunal), ☎ +34 91 446 75 81, [x]. A swingin' bar where you can twist the night away with local hipsters.
    Museo Chicote, Gran Via (Metro: Gran Via), [x]. Daily: 17:00-02:00. Voted the Best European Bar 2004 by MTV-Campari. Extensive cocktail list. Claims to have served drinks to many famous celebrities, including, Ava Gardner, Frank Sinatra, Lana Turner, Gary Cooper, Orson Wells, Yul Brynner, Ernest Hemingway, Catherine Zeta Jones, Hugh Grant, and Tim Robbins. They only serve drinks.
    Pinkleton & Wine, Pl. de San Miguel, s/n, 28005 Madrid, ☎ +34 915429199.
    Redbar, Joaquín María López 28 (Metro: Islas Filipinas), [x]. Daily: 17:00-02:00. Small, cozy cocktail bar with great music and a very nice and original decoration. Extensive cocktail list. 

Tapas Bars
Tapas bar snacks

In the tapas bars, you should get free food with your drinks.
Clubs

Clubs generally open at about midnight. If you go in any earlier you may find it quite empty. Many clubs don't close until 6AM, and even then everyone is still full of life.

    El Sol Disco club, Calle Jardines, 3 (Metro: Gran Via), ☎ +34 915224403, [x]. Tu-Sa 24:00-05:30. Popular with the 20-30 age group. Plays a mix of 70s, funk, and bossanova sounds. No dress code, but people do tend to look cool.
    Independance, C. de Atocha, 127, 28012 Madrid (Metro: Sol), ☎ +34 683516474, [x]. Rock and Indie
    Joy Eslava Madrid, Calle Arenal 11 (Metro: Sol), ☎ +34 915750627, [x]. Well known across Europe. Attracts a multi-national crowd. Popular with tourists as well as locals. It plays a mix of popular dance music. Every Thursday there is a Students Party.
    Kapital Disco club, Atocha, 125 (Metro: Atocha), ☎ +34 914202906, [x]. Enormous club with 7 floors. However, despite it's popularity this club is usually not worth visiting. The owner has the policy to try and limit the number of foreigners in the club so if you are from anywhere except Spain, you will likely get bad treatment.
    Palacio Gaviria, Calle Arenal 9 (Metro: Sol), ☎ +34 910600800, [x]. Stunning club, decorated as a lavish 16th century palace, complete with sweeping marble staircase. Several rooms, including two dance floors with different music. Spanish pop, dance, R&B, and other commercial sounds.
    Stardust Night club, C. de Isabel la Católica, 6, 28013 Madrid (Metro: Plaza España), [x]. From 00:00 to 07:00AM. 

Sleep
Budget

    Cat's Hostel, Calle Cañizares 6, ☎ +34 91 3692807 (info@catshostel.com), [x]. Located in the 17th century palace, but has a modern interior and is clean and secure. Breakfast and internet is included in the price and there is also a bar. It attracts young backpackers. Shared dormitories 4-14 people.
    CH Plaza D'ort Rooms, Plaza del Angel 13, ☎ +34 910054056. Cheap hotel with a good location near Plaza de Santa Ana. All rooms feature bathrooms, TV and air conditioning.
    Generator Madrid Hostel, Calle de Silva, 1, 28013 Madrid, ☎ +34 910 47 98 00 (ask.madrid@generatorhostels.com), [x]. Free wi-fi, rooftop terrace.
    Hat Eco hostel, Calle Imperial 9, ☎ +34 91 77 28 572, [x]. Rather modern, solid and clean, basic facilities; dorms of different sizes; no real kitchen; breakfast included at least when booked via the hostel's site, centrally located near Plaza Mayor, walking distance from Sol metro station.
    MH Fuencarral Hostal, Calle Fuencarral 10 3º (Metro: Gran Via), ☎ +34 91 5220585, [x]. Centrally located, all rooms include bathroom, TV, free wi-fi, air conditioning, central heating, laundry, and baggage storage facilities. Rooms with kitchen, washing machine and fridge are also available.
    San Martin Hostal, Calle Concepción Arenal 4 (Metro: Callao), ☎ +34 915 319176, [x]. Small, clean guest-house on the 4th floor. Ideally located just meters from Gran Via, with great staff and free wi-fi. All rooms have sink & shower, but most share bathrooms.
    Visa Hostal, Calle Pérez Galdós 7, ☎ +34 91 5310987. Simple, clean and secure. Central location close to Gran Via. Friendly staff.
    Way Hostel Residence, Calle Relatores 17, ☎ +34-914-200-583, [x]. Small hostel, nice ambiance and is catered to young traveleres. Nice kitchen, friendly staff, and free internet. 

Mid-range

    Artistic Bed & Breakfast, Calle Lope de Vega, 11, ☎ +34 654368611 (info@artisticbandb.com), [x]. Conveniently located in the center of Madrid, a quiet bed and breakfast with a unique style and decoration.
    Asturias, Calle del Gral. Ricardos, 67, 28019 Madrid, ☎ +34 914711027‎ (asturias@chh.es).
    Madrid Preciados Hotel, Calle Preciados nº37, ☎ +34 91 454 44 01, [x]. Hotel with excellent location.
    Me Madrid Reina Victoria, Plaza de Santa Ana, 14, ☎ +34 91 7016000, [x]. Located in Plaza de Santa Ana.
    NH Nacional Hotel, (Opposite Atocha station, in the heart of the Art Triangle, 1 minute from the new exhibition center ‘Caixa Forum’ and the botanical gardens.), [x].
    Only You Boutique Hotel, Calle Barquillo 21, 28004, Madrid (In the Chueca neighborhood, just north of Calle de Alcala and West of Paseo de Recoletos.), ☎ +34 910052222, [x]. Lounge & bar with DJ entertainment.
    Paquita Hostal, Calle Lacoma 5, ☎ +34 91 739 3831, [x]. Family-run hostal.
    Regina Madrid Hotel, Calle Alcalá 19 (Metro: Sevilla), [x]. One of the best known hotels in Madrid, is located on Alcala street, next to the Puerta del Sol. All rooms have Internet access. 

Splurge
Hotel Atlantico Madrid

    Atlantico Madrid Hotel, Gran Vía 38 (next to Callao Metro Station and just 500 metres from the Puerta del Sol), ☎ +34 915226480, [x]. Rooms and Terrace with panoramic views of the city. Free internet access in all the rooms.
    Bless Hotel, C. de Velázquez, 62, 28001 Madrid, ☎ +34 91 575 28 00, [x]. This hotel has been providing stylish accommodation for over 50 years.
    Eurostars Suites Mirasierra Hotel, Calle de Alfredo Marquerie 43, ☎ +34 91 727 79 00, [x]. A modern luxury hotel located in prestigious residential district Mirasierra, overlooking the Sierra de Guadarama.
    Gran Melia Fenix, Hermosilla 2, ☎ +34 902 14 44 40, [x]. Distinguishes by a grand and glowing white exterior; neo-classical design; an illustrious interior of flowing banisters, bold colors, and noble décor.
    Iberostar Las Letras Gran Via Hotel, Gran via 11, ☎ +34 915237980, [x]. Old building with tasteful modern interior. Well sound-proofed against the busy Gran Via outside. Very comfortable beds. Rooms with TV, wi-fi, mini bar, bath, and shower. Optional breakfast buffet with a wide choice of good quality food and drinks. Pleasant, comfortable bar.
    Magna Villa Hotel, Paseo de la Castellana 22, ☎ +34 91 5871234, [x]. Hotel is on one of Madrid's most exclusive streets. 151 rooms and suites. The hotel is surrounded by landscaped gardens.
    Maria Elena Palace, C/ Aduana 19, ☎ +34 913 604 930‎ (mep@chh.es). The Hotel María Elena Palace is located just 200 meters away from the Puerta del Sol. Renowned for its magnificent glass dome in the lobby.
    Meninas Hotel, Calle Campomanes 7, ☎ +34 91 541 28 05 (reservas@hotelmeninas.com), [x]. Hotel in an exquisite historic building of the 19th century in the historic center of Madrid that has been transformed into a state-of-the-art boutique hotel. A classic atmosphere blended with modern decorative touches - a balance of unpretentious formality and well-tempered cordiality.
    NH Palacio de Tepa Hotel, San Sebastian 2, 28012 Madrid, ☎ +34 91 389 64 90 (nhpalaciodetepa@nh-hotels.com), [x]. checkin: 3.00PM; checkout: 12.00PM. Located in the Las Letras district, the NH Palacio de Tepa hotel is surrounded by history and romance. Just a five-minute walk away guests can visit the famous Plaza Mayor and close to Plaza Santa Ana enchant tourists and locals.
    Osuna, Calle Luis De La Mata 18, ☎ +34 917418100, [x]. Set in the middle of the main business districts.
    Petit Palace Lealtad Plaza, Calle Antonio Maura, 5 28014, ☎ +34 915 224 547, [x]. Elegant hotel in the Retiro district, a very central and lively Mardid location.
    Quatro Puerta Del Sol Hotel, Sevilla 4, ☎ +34 91 532 90 49 (puertadelsol@hotelesquo.com), [x]. The turn-of-the-century grandeur with modern conveniences and amenities. Hotel Quo Puerta del Sol is housed in an emblematic building from the beginning of the 20th century with unique views of the city.
    Quo Godoy Hotel, Avenida Quitapesares 35, [x]. Hotel with an avant-garde design. The hotel features 99 guest rooms fully equipped, including 2 disabled rooms, 18 duplex rooms, and 1 junior suite. Adjacent to the hotel is a convention center that is directly connected and can hold a variety of events from 10 to 800 people. Offering an indoor heated swimming pool, health and beauty spa center, aquatic treatments, and fitness area. 

Internet

When traveling in Spain it is not easy to get connected, Internet pre-paid cards can be purchased but with few formalities. Wi-Fi points in bars and cafeterias in Madrid are available after ordering, and most hotels offer Wi-Fi connections in common areas for their guests.

Madrid buses also have wi-fi connections although the speed can vary.

The best option is to rent a prepaid portable Wi-Fi Hot spot. This service is now available in Madrid and the whole of Spain, provided by local internet previdors which allows the connection to any Wi-Fi device without roaming charges: Smart-phones, Tablets, PC.
Contact
"Locutorios" (Call Shops) are widely spread in Madrid near touristy locations. In Madrid do it's very easy. Making calls from "Locutorios" tend to be much cheaper, especially international calls (usually made through VoIP). They are usually a good pick for calling home. 

Link: https://wikitravel.org/en/Madrid