New York City (also referred to as "New York", "NYC", or "The Big Apple"), is the most populous city in the United States. It lies at the mouth of the Hudson River in the southernmost part of the state of New York.

New York City has a population of approximately 8.2 million people. The New York Metropolitan Area, which spans lower New York, northern New Jersey, and southwestern Connecticut, has a population of 18.7 million, making it the largest metropolitan area in the U.S. As of 2014, it was one of the 15 largest metro areas in the world.

New York City is a center for media, culture, food, fashion, art, research, finance, and trade. It has one of the largest and most famous skylines on earth, dominated by the iconic Empire State Building.
Boroughs

New York City consists of five boroughs, which are five separate counties. Each borough has a unique culture and could be a large city in its own right. Within each borough individual neighborhoods, some several square miles in size, and others only a few blocks in size, have personalities lauded in music and film. The five New York boroughs are:
New York City District Map.png
	Manhattan (New York County)
The famous island between the Hudson and East Rivers, with many diverse and unique neighborhoods. Manhattan is home to the Empire State Building in Midtown, Central Park, Times Square, Wall Street, Harlem, and the trendy neighborhoods of Greenwich Village and SoHo.
	Brooklyn (Kings County)
The most populous borough, and formerly a separate city. Located south and east of Manhattan across the East River. Known for the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, Prospect Park, The Brooklyn Museum, The New York Aquarium and a key NYC landmark Coney Island.
	Queens (Queens County)
Located to the east of Manhattan, across the East River, and north, east, and south of Brooklyn. With over 170 languages spoken, Queens is the most ethnically diverse region in the United States, and one of the most diverse in the world.
	The Bronx (Bronx County)
Located north of Manhattan Island, the Bronx is home to the Bronx Zoo, the New York Botanical Gardens, and the New York Yankees professional baseball team.
	Staten Island (Richmond County)
A large island in New York Harbor, south of Manhattan and just across from New Jersey. Unlike the other boroughs, Staten Island has a somewhat slower pace and has less density. It contains several parks and a zoo.
Understand
Central Park is pretty at any time of the year.

New York City is one of the global hubs of international finance, politics, communications, film, music, fashion, and culture. Alongside London it's one of only two universally acknowledged to be "World Cities" - the most important and influential cities on Earth. It's home to many world-class museums, art galleries, and theaters. Many of the world's largest corporations have their headquarters here. The headquarters of the United Nations is in New York and most countries have a consulate here. This city's influence on the globe, and all its inhabitants, is hard to overstate, as decisions made within its boundaries often have impacts and ramifications across the world.

Immigrants (and their descendants) from over 180 countries live here, making it one of the most cosmopolitan cities in the world. Travelers are attracted to New York City for its culture, energy and cosmopolitanism. English is the primary language spoken by most New Yorkers although in many communities it is common to hear other languages that are generally widely understood. In many neighborhoods, there is a large Latino/Hispanic population, and many New Yorkers speak Spanish. Most cab drivers speak either Arabic, Hindi or Bengali. There are also many neighborhoods throughout the city that have a high concentration of Chinese immigrants where Mandarin or Cantonese may be useful. In some of these neighborhoods, some locals may not speak very good English, but store owners and those who would deal frequently with tourists or visitors all will speak English.

The World Trade Center attacks of 11 September 2001 were a shared ordeal for the city's inhabitants. Despite those events, from 2003 to the present, New York City has rebounded and surpassed itself in growth.

Crime is down to one-third of the levels of 1990 and New York City is now one of the safest large cities in America.
Orientation

At the center and western edge of New York City is the borough of Manhattan, a long, narrow island nestled in a natural harbor. It is separated from The Bronx on the north-east by the Harlem River (actually a tidal strait); from Queens and Brooklyn to the east and south by the East River (also a tidal strait); and from the State of New Jersey to the west and north by the Hudson River. Staten Island lies to the south-west, across Upper New York Bay.

Although Manhattan runs northeast to southwest, it is referred to as if it ran north-south. Thus, "uptown" means north, and "downtown" means south. Street numbers continue from Manhattan into the Bronx, and the street numbers rise as one moves farther north (however, in the Bronx, there is no simple numerical grid, so there may be 7 blocks between 167 St. and 170 St., for example). Avenues run north and south. In Brooklyn the opposite is true, as street numbers rise as one moves south. Queens streets are laid out in a perpendicular grid - street numbers rise as one moves toward the east, and avenues run east and west. Staten Island has no street numbers at all.

The term “the city” may refer either to New York City as a whole, or to the borough of Manhattan alone, depending on the context. The other boroughs, which are Brooklyn, The Bronx, Staten Island, and Queens, are sometimes referred to as “the outer boroughs.” The term "upstate" generally refers to any part of the State of New York north of the city limits of the Bronx, but not neighboring New Jersey or Connecticut.
Climate
Climate 	Jan 	Feb 	Mar 	Apr 	May 	Jun 	Jul 	Aug 	Sep 	Oct 	Nov 	Dec
Daily highs (°F) 	38 	41 	50 	61 	71 	79 	84 	82 	75 	64 	53 	43
Nightly lows (°F) 	26 	28 	35 	44 	54 	63 	69 	68 	60 	50 	41 	32
Precipitation (in) 	4.1 	3.1 	4.4 	4.3 	4.7 	3.8 	4.6 	4.2 	4.2 	3.8 	4.4 	3.9
												
												
												
Check New York's 7 day forecast at NOAA

New York City has a humid subtropical climate, experiencing all four seasons and with about 50 inches (1,200mm) of rainfall evenly distributed throughout the year. Depending on the time of the year you visit it would be optimal to know what kind of weather you should expect.

Winter: Winters in NYC are chilly and damp. However due to the moderating effect of the ocean and the urban heat island, the city does have warmer temperatures when compared to other cities on the same latitude like Pittsburgh, Columbus or Indianapolis. Nighttime lows usually hover around freezing and daytime highs are usually between the low 40s and the mid 50s (5C-15C). How cold or how warm it gets though depends greatly upon the location you're at in the city: the northern and western parts of the metropolitan area (like The Bronx, Yonkers and Newark) are usually colder during the night while the southern - southeastern areas such as Staten Island and Long Island may have milder temperatures. Sometimes the mercury may dip down to the teens (around -10C) but prolonged cold periods are very rare. New York is the second snowiest city out of the big 5 in the northeast, being 17 inches behind Boston but 5 inches in front of Philadelphia. The first snowfall of the year usually happens around early or mid-November and the last one in late February or early March. The city is prone to big snowstorms that can produce up to 1-2 feet of snow. While such events can create a winter wonderland keep in mind that they can also cause big traffic bottlenecks especially on highways. How much snow falls depends on the location in the city as the aforementioned colder areas also tend to receive more snow than the aforementioned warmer areas (JFK airport receives 2 inches less snow than Central Park and 5 inches less snow than Newark on average). Nor-easters (storms with strong winds that produce mostly rain but also snow) do affect the city and represent a large chunk of the total precipitation in winter and spring.

Summer: Summertime is the time when most visitors arrive at NYC. The weather is generally mild with the ocean keeping the weather from being unbearably hot. Daytime highs are usually between the low 70s and the high 80s (20C-30C) and nighttime lows hover around 60F (16C). The city can experience heatwaves though that can make days particularly hot especially in places like Manhattan and inland areas like Newark, Patterson and the Yonkers which may become quite repulsive when the daytime high hits the 90s (30C and above). In stark contrast, coastal areas south of Long Island and Staten Island benefit significantly from the sea breeze that keeps temperatures much cooler even if Manhattan is sweltering. Prolonged hot periods are quite rare though. Rainfall is also a distinctive feature of the summer months as most of it falls between June and September and when it happens the weather may turn a bit chilly.

Spring - Autumn: Spring and Autumn are generally identical when it comes the climate and are generally considered some of the best times to visit the city with generally mild temperatures. Keep in mind however that the weather in March and November may be quite similar to that of winter and the city does usually see at least one light snowfall every year during those months. Nor-easters are also more prevalent during Spring than Autumn, while during Autumn the changed color of the leaves is in full sight, especially in large, green areas like Central Park.
People

The diverse population runs the gamut from some of America's wealthiest celebrities and socialites to homeless people. There are millions of immigrants living in the city. New York's population has been diverse since the city's founding by the Dutch. Successive waves of immigration from virtually every nation in the world make New York a giant social experiment in cross-cultural harmony.

The city's ethnic heritage illuminates different neighborhoods throughout the five boroughs. Manhattan's Chinatown remains a vibrant center of New York City's Chinese community, though in recent years the very large Chinese community in Flushing, Queens, has rivaled if not eclipsed it in importance, and three other Chinatowns have formed in New York City: the Brooklyn Chinatown in Sunset Park; the Elmhurst Chinatown in Queens; and the Avenue U Chinatown located in the Homecrest section of Brooklyn. Traces of the Lower East Side's once-thriving Jewish community still exist amid the newly-gentrified neighborhood's trendy restaurants and bars, but there are Chassidic communities in Borough Park, Crown Heights and Williamsburg, Brooklyn. Harlem has been gentrifying and diversifying and remains a center of African-American culture in New York. East (Spanish) Harlem still justifies its reputation as a large Hispanic neighborhood. Little known to most tourists are the large Dominican neighborhoods of Hamilton Heights and Washington Heights in upper Manhattan. Brooklyn's Greenpoint is famous for its large and vibrant Polish community, and the Flatbush section - once home to the Brooklyn Dodgers - is today a huge and thriving Caribbean and West Indian section. Queens and Brooklyn are known for being home to many of New York's more recent immigrant groups, which since 1990 have included large numbers of Russians, Uzbeks, Nigerians, Chinese, Irish, Italian, French, Filipinos, Yugoslavians, Indians, Sri Lankans, Pakistanis, Bangladeshis, Japanese, Koreans, Thais, Kenyans, Arabs (from throughout the Middle East and northern Africa), Mexicans, Puerto Ricans, Cubans, Dominicans, Ecuadorians, Brazilians, Colombians and Jamaicans. New York City's Caucasian population who are native born New Yorkers are overwhelmingly descended from the previous centuries immigrants: Irish, Italian or Eastern European Jewish, a smaller percentage are Turks, Yugoslavs, Albanians. Each of these groups has brought their cuisines with them, making NYC a city where authentic bagels, Pizza and ethnic foods are available everywhere. An important change has been taking place in the population recently. During the last 2 decades and especially since 2003, large numbers of young people, many of them recent college graduates and professionals from the rest of the USA have moved to New York City, mostly to Brooklyn, Manhattan, and the parts of Queens closest to Manhattan. They have changed things considerably and continue to add to New York's vitality and artistic output. They have completely changed their neighborhoods in Brooklyn and Manhattan, such as Williamsburg, Brooklyn and Lower East side, Manhattan. One important thing to note about New York City, is its never-ending change, new stores, businesses, buildings and even skyscrapers replace the previous structures, there is always new construction. Photographs of the same busy street 10 or 20 years ago are unrecognizable today.
Economy

New York City is home to 46 Fortune 500 companies. Its gross metropolitan product of $1.7 trillion is the largest of any American city and represented approximately 9% of the American economy. If it were a nation, the city would have the 16th-highest GDP in the world. New York's constantly expanding economy is the main reason why millions have immigrated to the city, from all over the world and all over the country over the past 2 centuries of the city's growth.

New York is the national center for several industries. It's the home of the two largest US stock exchanges (NYSE, NASDAQ) and many banks. The famous Wall Street is where the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) is as well as the famous investment banks and financial investment firms. Wall Street is located in the Financial District of Lower Manhattan.
Get in
By plane

IATA: NYC is the code for all New York City airports, and the city is extremely well connected by air with flights from almost every corner of the world.

John F. Kennedy International Airport (IATA: JFK) is the largest international airport in NYC while LaGuardia Airport (IATA: LGA) is a busy domestic airport, and Newark Liberty International Airport (IATA: EWR) is the second largest and is the primary international airport in NJ. All three airports are run by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Inter-airport transfers

    Bus/Subway - Connections between airports using the bus/subway/PATH trains are the cheapest option, but will require many transfers. Set aside a minimum of 2 hours for travel time.

    New York City Airporter Bus - Service between JFK, LaGuardia, and Newark Airports ($14 between JFK and LaGuardia [1 hour], $27 from/to Newark [2-3 hours]). Buses depart every 20-30 minutes. A bus transfer is required to the Newark Airport Express Bus at the Port Authority Bus Terminal for Newark Airport to and from JFK and LaGuardia Airports.

    ETS Air Shuttle - runs very infrequent shared ride van service between LGA and EWR for $32. The rides cost $10 between LGA and JFK, $32 between EWR and LGA and $29 between JFK and EWR.

    All County Express - runs very infrequent shared ride van service between all LGA and EWR for $32.

    Taxis - the fastest option when changing airports. A taxi between JFK and LGA will cost about $25-29 and should take 30min. A taxi between LGA and EWR will cost about $78 + tolls and should take 60-75min. A taxi between JFK and EWR will cost about $85 + tolls and should take 60-75min.

    Helicopter Transfer - A common method of travel or business people to downtown as well as smaller private airports. Companies like New York Helicopter offer these services.

John F. Kennedy International Airport

John F. Kennedy International Airport (IATA: JFK) is in the borough of Queens. There are eight terminals that are not very close to each other (with two that are to be demolished and soon rebuilt), so it is important to note which terminal from which your flight leaves. Click here for a list of airlines and the terminals from which they operate. AirTrain connects the terminals - note that it is only free if you are traveling between terminals; to either terminus, the fare is $8.

There is Wi-Fi via Boingo, which is free in certain areas of the airport, but is not always reliable.

If you must connect via JFK and change terminals, make sure you have sufficient time of at least 2 hours for domestic flights and 3 hours for international flights. However, the security and immigration procedures for non-US citizens are monumentally time-consuming and tiresome.

Left luggage services are available in the arrivals areas of Terminal 1 and Terminal 4 and cost $4-16 per bag per day, depending on size. There are plenty of ATMs, but almost all charge a $2-3 fee per withdrawal.

JFK is the biggest airport within NYC and the only airport within NYC that handles international flights to nearly every country.

To travel between JFK and Manhattan ("the city"):
By rail

    JFK AirTrain - a people mover system that runs 24/7, connecting all airport terminals with nearby rail and metro stations for $7.75 plus $1 for MetroCard . Runs services to:
        Howard Beach Station to connect with the "A" train (to Brooklyn and Lower Manhattan). When returning to the airport on the "A" train, be sure to board a train to Far Rockaway or Rockaway Park, NOT to Lefferts Blvd. Look for this destination sign on the side of the train as many tourists often mistakenly take the Lefferts Blvd train when not paying attention.
        Jamaica Station to connect with the:
            "E" train (to Queens and Midtown Manhattan).
            "J/Z" trains (to Brooklyn and Lower Manhattan). Marginally faster, and much less crowded, than the "E". Note that during rush hours, the "J" and "Z" operate a skip-stop service, bypassing alternate stations between Manhattan and Queens.
            Long Island Railroad to Penn Station ($4.25 weekend with CityTicket, $7.75 weekday off-peak, $10.75 peak times), Brooklyn, or Long Island. Elevators are available at Jamaica and Penn Stations.

Total time to Manhattan using the subway is 60min; using the Long Island Railroad is 45min. This is sometimes faster than taking a taxi. If you take the "A" or "J" during overnight hours, be alert of your surroundings as the train passes through some rough neighborhoods.
By road

    MTA NYC Bus - costing $2.90 (with MetroCard plus $1 fee if new, $3.25 single-ride ticket), these are the cheapest methods of transport, although the slowest to Manhattan. The buses used to depart from Terminal 5, but have now been truncated to a new terminus at the Lefferts Boulevard Airtrain station due to airport terminal construction. These buses have little room for luggage and go to non-touristy neighborhoods in Queens and Brooklyn. However, they offer connections to the subway and Long Island Railroad. Note that free transfers between bus and subway are available only with a MetroCard; the single ride ticket does not allow free transfers. Coins (not bills) are needed to board the buses without a MetroCard. OMNY is also available as a method to pay the fare by tapping your NFC compatible phone, bank card with contactless symbol, NFC compatible smart watch, or OMNY card at the reader located at the front of the bus. MetroCards are sold at Hudson Newsstands in Terminals 1 and 5. If the newsstands are closed and you would like to spend 30 minutes to save $2.25, take the Airtrain to the Howard Beach Station where you can buy a multiple ride Metrocard from the vending machines without leaving the station (free). Then take the Airtrain back one stop to the Lefferts Boulevard station, where you can cross the street for the Q10, Q10 Limited, Q3, and B15 buses. (As said before, buses terminate at Lefferts Boulevard Airtrain station due to major airport reconstruction) Bus to subway/LIRR transfers include:
        Q3 to:
            Jamaica-179th St (45 minutes): "F" Train
        Q10 to:
            Ozone Park-Lefferts Blvd (25 minutes on local, 15 minutes on Q10 Limited): "A" Train - the subway connection closest to the airport
            Jamaica Ave & Lefferts Blvd: "J" & "Z" Trains (walk 3 blocks E to 121st St Jamaica Ave Stn)
            Kew Gardens (37 minutes): Transfer here to the Long Island Railroad (Austin St Stn) with service to Penn Station ($8 peak, $5.75 off-peak, $4 weekend with CityTicket), Brooklyn, and Long Island. While this option is cheaper than taking the AirTrain to Jamaica and connecting there to the LIRR, LIRR service from here is much less frequent than LIRR service from Jamaica.
            Kew Gardens-Union Turnpike (Last Stop) (40 minutes on local, 30 minutes on Q10 Limited): "E" & "F" Trains. During rush hours, from this stop, you can take express buses X63, X64, X68, QM18, and QM21 to Manhattan. While these routes are slower and more expensive than taking the subway, they do offer a ride on cloth seats without the crowding. Ask where the bus stops are located. $6.75, but it is $4.00 if you transfer from the Q10 bus and pay for both with a MetroCard. NOTE: Taking the Q10 Limited to the Kew Gardens-Union Turnpike Station from the Airtrain and then transferring to the subway is the most cost effective option into Midtown Manhattan, it can save $8.25 by avoiding the Airtrain fare.
        B15 to:
            Ashford Street & New Lots Avenue (30min): "3" Train.
            Van Sinderen Ave & New Lots Avenue (35min): "L" Train.
            Fulton Street & Kingston-Throop Avenues (60min): "C" Train.
            Flushing Ave.: "J" Train all times except weekdays 7AM-1PM towards Manhattan and 1PM-8PM away from Manhattan, "M" Train weekdays (at Broadway).

Transfers from the B15 to the subway are in some of Brooklyn's roughest neighborhoods, so this route is not recommended at night or for people unfamiliar with the city.

    Go Airlink Shuttle - Shared van service to or from most of Manhattan.
    Shared ride van services - Some companies as ETS Airport Shuttle and All County Express run very infrequent shared ride van service between airports.
    Taxi - The most flexible route into the city from JFK is a taxi, although the wait for one can be long when many flights arrive simultaneously. Fare runs a flat $52.50 to anywhere in Manhattan, not including tolls (up to $5.50) or tips. Taxis to points other than Manhattan and taxis to the airport from anywhere use the meter (see taxis in 'Getting around"). The arrivals terminals are filled with drivers hawking illegal livery rides - if you want to take one of these, be sure to negotiate the fare in advance and make sure that it is cheaper than the taxi fare noted above. This also saves the wait in the taxi line. In general, though, it is not recommended if you are unfamiliar with the city.
    Car Service/Limousines - An alternative to taxis, car services are useful for getting to the airport from the outer boroughs where taxis are harder to find, or if you prefer to have transportation reserved in advance. Typically $60+ between JFK and Manhattan.

Newark Liberty International Airport

Newark Liberty International Airport IATA: EWR (+1 800 397 4636) located to the west of NYC in Newark and Elizabeth, New Jersey. The airport has three terminals labeled A, B, C. Click here for a list of airlines and the terminals from which they operate.

To travel between the city and EWR:

    'New Jersey Transit Bus #62 and other NJT Buses - The most inexpensive option, New Jersey Transit #62 bus runs from in front of the airport terminals to Newark Penn Station (one-way fare $1.60; exact change only; 25min). From there, you may take a PATH subway train ($2.75) either to World Trade Center station in lower Manhattan (25min), or, to Journal Square, where you can transfer to the Journal Square-33rd St train across the platform, which runs to the following stops along 6th Ave: Christopher St in Greenwich Village, 9th St, 14th St, 23rd St, and 33rd St. Plan on 90 minutes including waiting times. The #62 Bus operates 24/7 between Elizabeth and Newark Penn Station, including holidays. Service generally runs every 10-15 minutes weekdays, 15-20 minutes Saturdays, and 20-30 minutes Sundays, with overnight service every 30 minutes. Other buses, such as the Go 28 Bus, the 37 Bus, the 40 Bus, and the #67 Bus stops in Newark Airport at Terminals A, B, and C. Passengers who are stopped at the North Area of Newark Airport can be transferred by the Go 28 Bus.
    AirTrain Newark - easily accessed from the airport terminals via elevator/escalators and runs 24 hours to Newark Airport Rail Station, 10min away, however, there's a $7.75 fee when exiting/entering to the Newark Airport Station (the $7.75 fee is included in the $15.25 NJ Transit train ticket). From here you can take a NJ Transit train (30min ride, every 15-30min) to New York Penn Station (34th St & 8th Ave in Manhattan) or Amtrak train to other destinations along the east coast. Amtrak also runs trains to Manhattan, but they cost $20-30. NJ Transit tickets are not valid on Amtrak trains. NJ Transit trains stop at both Penn Station in Newark and at Penn Station in New York, so if travelling to Manhattan, stay on till the second Penn Station, in New York.
    NJ Transit Trains operate 21h a day so there's no nightly service 2-5am.

    Newark Airport Express Bus - ($18.50 one way, $31.50 round-trip inclusive of their $1.50 processing fee) runs every 15min. Stops in 3 spots in Manhattan (Port Authority, Bryant Park, and Grand Central Station). The trip takes about 35min to 2 hours depending on traffic. Children under 5 ride for free. Seniors 62 or older get a discount.

    Go Airlink Shuttle - Shared van door-to-door service. around $30 to Manhattan (around half for subsequent passengers).
    Taxis - Travelers from EWR to New York City are charged a flat rate based on the destination (the dispatcher will note the fare and destination on the taxi form). Fare to most parts of Manhattan is $50-70. Tips and round trip tolls ($8 to/from Manhattan) are extra. You may also pay a $2 toll if the driver uses the New Jersey Turnpike. A $5 surcharge is added for trips to to New York, except Staten Island, during weekday rush hours or weekend afternoons. There is also a 10% discount for people above age 62.
    Private Car Service - An alternative to taxis, car services are useful for getting to the airport from the outer boroughs where taxis are harder to find, or if you prefer to have transportation reserved in advance. Typically $50 between EWR and Manhattan, $70-80 to/from Brooklyn.
    [1] - A subsidiary of ATC Buses - Avalos Transportation Company Inc, charter bus- coach & minibus rentals company with top of the line deluxe motorcoaches and minibuses for groups that are 15 passengers or more, offering a unique experience and one of the very few that also provides meet and greet services on major airports like EWR Airport in the Nation and the World.

LaGuardia Airport

LaGuardia Airport (IATA: LGA) in Queens is the smallest of the New York Metropolitan Area's three major airports, but the closest to Manhattan. Due to regulations, almost all direct flights from LGA are to destinations within 1,500 miles (2,419km). Most flights are domestic; however, there are international flights from LGA to Canada, Aruba, the Bahamas and Bermuda. The airport has been routinely ranked low in timeliness and customer satisfaction.

To travel between the city and LGA:

    Local Bus - costing $2.75, this is the cheapest method of transport, although the slowest to Manhattan. The buses have little room for luggage (M60 SBS and Q70 routes have luggage racks on board). However, they offer connections to the subway and Long Island Railroad. Free transfers between bus and subway, subway and bus, and bus and bus are available only with a MetroCard; the single ride ticket does not allow free transfers and coins are needed to board the buses without a MetroCard. There is a change machine in the airport terminal and MetroCards can be bought in the airport at Hudson News. The MetroCard vending machine at the airport does not accept cash.

    M60 & Q70 LaGuardia Link Select Bus Service (SBS). An off-board fare payment system are in use on these routes, and a proof-of-payment ticket must be obtained before boarding the M60 or Q70 SBS routes by using a MetroCard, single ride ticket, or coins at the SBS fare machines located at the bus stop. These machines do not vend MetroCards, one must still be obtained in the airport first.

Bus to subway/LIRR transfers include:

        M60, particularly useful if you are staying in Harlem, the Upper West Side or Hostelling International New York, to:
            Astoria Blvd (15-25min): "N" and "W" Trains ( "W" trains weekdays only)
            125th St & Lexington Ave (30min): "4", "5", "6" Trains & Metro-North Railroad
            125th St & Lenox Ave./Malcolm X Blvd (30min): "2" & "3" Trains
            125th St & 8th Ave./St. Nicholas Ave (35min): "A", "B" (weekdays only), "C", and "D" Trains
            116th St & Broadway (40min): "1" Train
        Q47 from Marine Air Terminal to:
            Jackson Heights/Roosevelt Avenue for the "E", "F", "M" (weekdays only), "R", and "7" trains. (30min)
        Q48 to:
            Flushing (30min): Long Island Railroad, as well as buses to Eastern Queens and northern Nassau County.
        Q70 from any of the other terminals nonstop to:
            Jackson Heights/Roosevelt Avenue (8-10min without traffic) for the "E", "F", "M" (weekdays only), "R", and "7" trains.
            Woodside-61st Street (15-20 minutes without traffic) for "7" train & Long Island Railroad
        Q72 to:
            Junction Blvd & Roosevelt Avenue for "7" train. (20min) or
            Rego Park for "M" (weekdays only) or "R" trains (35-40min)

    Go Airlink Shuttle - Shared van door-to-door service. $16 to Manhattan. 10% discount for online purchase.

    New York City Airporter Bus - provides services to/from Grand Central Terminal and the Port Authority Bus Terminal for $15 one-way, $28 round-trip. Buses depart every 15-30min and the trip to Grand Central Terminal can take up to 65min.

    Taxis cost $21-30 to/from Manhattan plus tips, tolls, a $0.50 tax to NY, and a $1 surcharge during rush hour. You can save on tolls by asking the driver to use Queensboro Bridge for points midtown and on the Upper East Side, the Williamsburg Bridge for the Village and downtown, or Brooklyn and Manhattan Bridges for points downtown. If going above 72nd St, it is better to pay the toll ($5.50) and take the RFK Bridge into Manhattan.

    Private Car Service - An alternative to taxis, car services are useful for getting to the airport from the outer boroughs where taxis are harder to find, or if you prefer to have transportation reserved in advance. Typically $40+ between LGA and Manhattan.

Long Island MacArthur Airport

Long Island MacArthur Airport (Islip Airport) (IATA: ISP) in Ronkonkoma (Town of Islip) on Long Island. The airport is served by Southwest Airlines and Frontier, two major US discount carriers.

To travel between the city and ISP:

    A shuttle bus (10min, $5) operates between the ISP and the Ronkonkoma Long Island Railroad station. From there, you can take a train to Penn Station in Manhattan. (1.5h, $12.75 off peak/$17.50 peak). The Long Island Railroad offers a discount package ($17.50 per adult for shuttle+train to Manhattan)

    6 bus operates to/from the airport to Central Islip for $2.25. However, it isn't coordinated with the trains like the shuttle. (In the opposite direction, the bus serves the Patchogue railroad station, but that trip to Manhattan is longer and usually requires a transfer)

    Hampton Jitney bus services from Ronkonkoma to Manhattan cost $25; the bus stop's a short cab ride away from ISP.

Westchester County Airport

Westchester County Airport (IATA: HPN) is near the town of White Plains and is served by American, Cape Air, Delta, JetBlue, and United, mostly for flights on the East Coast.

To travel between the city and HPN:

    Beeline Bus #12 ($2.75; call +1-914-813-7777 for details) operates service to/from the White Plains Metro-North station. From there, you can take a Metro-North train ($6.25 off-peak and $8.50 peak) to any of various points in the Bronx, or 125th St/Park Ave and Grand Central Terminal in Manhattan. Trains run roughly every half hour for most of the day and take approximately 40min.

Stewart International Airport

Stewart International Airport (IATA: SWF) is 75 miles north of midtown Manhattan, near Newburgh. It mainly serves flights to/from Florida. To travel between the city and SWF:

    A shuttle bus ($1, 40 minutes, Mon-Fri only) connects SWF with the Beacon Metro-North Railroad Station. From there, you can take a train into Grand Central Terminal in Manhattan ($17.50 off-peak, $23 peak, approximately 90 minutes).
    Shortline operates bus service ($20, 90 minutes) between the airport and the Port Authority Bus Terminal in Manhattan. Buses are timed based on arrivals and departures of Norwegian Airlines flights.

Trenton-Mercer Airport

Trenton-Mercer Airport (IATA: TTN) is 63 miles southwest of Midtown Manhattan and offers limited commercial service on Frontier Airlines. Passengers flying into Trenton can reach Manhattan by taking the [2] 608 bus to the Trenton train station and then taking the Jersey Transit's Northeast Corridor Line or Amtrak to Penn Station.
Teterboro Airport

Teterboro Airport [3] (IATA: TEB) (ICAO: KTEB) is popular for general aviation and business jet travelers out of New York City, and one of the busiest private aviation airports in the world. Teterboro's weight limit of 100,000 pounds makes it nonviable for commercial aircraft, limiting traffic to general and executive aviation. Air taxi and air charter companies such as Incredijet Private Jet Charter, The Early Air Way, Monarch Air Group, Mercury Jets, Jetset Charter, and Private Jets Teterboro fly a variety of private charter aircraft and jets, from luxury Gulfstream's down to economical piston twins and helicopters for small groups and individuals.
By train
Amtrak

Amtrak +1 800 USA RAIL (+1 800 872 7245) operates from New York Penn Station, directly under Madison Square Garden, on 34th St between 7th & 8th Avenues. Popular trains leaving during rush hours can fill up quickly; it's a good idea to make reservations on-line or via phone and pick up your ticket using a credit card or your confirmation number at one of the electronic kiosks located throughout the station.

Amtrak's Acela express train provides regular 150 mph (240 km/h) commuter service between major points along the east coast such as Washington, D.C., Boston, Baltimore, Philadelphia, New Haven, and Providence. Amtrak services are also available to points along the East Coast down to Florida, across the southeast to New Orleans, to points between New York and Chicago, including Pittsburgh and Cleveland, to New York state including Albany, Rochester, Buffalo and Niagara Falls, and to Toronto and Montreal in Canada. Service to California takes 4 days and requires a change of train in Chicago.

Amtrak's ClubAcela Lounge, near the big security desk in Penn Station, offers complimentary drinks, WiFi, newspapers, magazines and clean bathrooms. Access to the club is granted to travelers with sleeper tickets, First Class Acela tickets, Amtrak GuestRewards SelectPlus membership, or United Airlines BusinessFirst tickets for same-day travel, and United Club members.
Commuter Rail
Grand Central Terminal at night

New York City is served by three commuter railroads. With the exception of the Metro-North Railroad, which starts at Grand Central Terminal, the other commuter railroads also start at Penn Station by Madison Square Garden.

    Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) operates between New York Penn Station and Long Island with New York City stops at Jamaica Station, Long Island City, and Hunters Point in Queens as well as Atlantic Terminal station in Brooklyn. LIRR tickets can be purchased on-line or inside stations prior to boarding the train. Tickets are also available for purchase on the train but are significantly more expensive. The cost of the ticket varies based on the distance of the ride.

    Metro-North Rail Road (Metro North) operates between Grand Central Terminal and points north and east of the city all the way to Connecticut. Trains also stop at the Harlem station on 125th Street and Park Avenue in Manhattan. The New Haven line serves cities along the coast with branch lines to Danbury and Waterbury. The Hudson Line serves points along the Hudson River to Poughkeepsie. The Harlem Line serves Westchester, Putnam, and Dutchess Counties to Pawling and Wassaic. At New Haven, passengers may transfer to Amtrak or to the Shore Line East providing local service between New Haven and New London, Connecticut. Metro North tickets can be purchased on-line or inside stations prior to boarding the train. Tickets are also available for purchase on the train but are significantly more expensive. The cost of the ticket varies based on the distance of the ride.

    New Jersey Transit operates between New York Penn Station and points in New Jersey. The Northeast corridor line goes to Princeton and Trenton. Services are also available for points along the Jersey Coast and, with a transfer in Secaucus, to points north of the city (in New Jersey and New York State west of the Hudson). Connecting service is available from Trenton to Philadelphia via SEPTA or to Camden (New Jersey) via RiverLINE. Connecting service to Newark Liberty International Airport is available from some Northeast corridor trains. NJ Transit tickets can be purchased online or inside stations prior to boarding the train. Tickets are also available for purchase on the train but are significantly more expensive. The cost of the ticket varies based on the distance of the ride.

PATH
PATH train at WTC terminal

PATH(Port Authority Trans-Hudson) is a subway type system connecting New York City to Hoboken, Newark, and various points on the New Jersey shore of the Hudson River. Two lines pass under the Hudson and enter the city, one terminating near the World Trade Center site downtown, the other at 33rd St in Midtown (see map). The PATH system is, therefore, a useful shortcut if traveling between Newark and Lower Manhattan, without having to travel all the way up to Penn Station, and then double back southward again. The PATH station at 33rd Street is not connected to, nor part of Penn Station.

PATH costs $2.75 per ride. PATH 10-ride discount: $21 for 10 rides, which are stored in a SmartLink Gray disposable paper card (no charge for the card) or a Smartlink green plastic card ($5 extra for the card). The PATH system also accepts the Pay-Per-Ride MetroCard (but not Unlimited Ride MetroCard). There's a $1 fee for buying a new Metrocard except if expired or damaged. For the visitor traveling from New Jersey daily, it is more convenient and possibly cheaper to purchase the MetroCard to travel on both the PATH and the MTA systems. However, remember there is no free MetroCard transfer between PATH and MTA subways/buses.
Path stations:

World Trade Center Line

    Newark Penn Station
    Harrison
    Journal Square-Change at Journal Square for 33st train
    Grove ST
    Exchange Place-Change here for the train to Hoboken
    WTC

34ST Line Transfer at Journal Square

    Journal Square
    Newport
    Christopher ST
    9th ST
    14 ST
    23 ST
    34 ST

By bus

Some buses offer WiFi, power outlets and even business-class style luxury. Buses serve New Jersey, New York suburbs west of the Hudson River, and all cities along the east coast of the US.

The NY Port Authority Bus Terminal at 625 8th Ave in Manhattan (8th Ave & W 42nd St next to Times Square - '42nd St Port Authority Bus Terminal' subway stop) [4] serves as a central bus terminal for several bus lines. However, not all lines go into the NY Port Authority Bus Terminal. Check the bus departure/arrival points before booking.
Intercity public bus companies operating to/from New York City

    New Jersey Transit operates service between destinations in New Jersey and Manhattan's Port Authority Bus Terminal on 8th Ave & 42nd St.
    Lakeland operates Rt#46 (To Dover), 78 (Bernardsville or Bedminster) and 80 (Newton or Sparta) from Port Authority Bus Terminal.
    Lucky Star runs between Boston and Chinatown at least hourly 6AM-11PM and at 2AM. WiFi on some buses. From $1 online, $15 walk-up.
    Peter Pan Bus
    Greyhound
    Go Buses runs from Cambridge and Newton
    Best Bus service to/from Washington DC. WiFi.
    Academy Bus - Operates commuter services from New York to Burlington, Mercer, Middlesex, Monmouth and Ocean Counties in New Jersey. Casino Express service to/from Atlantic City and Mohegan Sun.
    Ocean Bus, Service to/from Buffalo via Liverpool (near Syracuse) and Rochester.
    FlixBus, Service to/from major cities along the East Coast of the U.S. from Boston to Atlanta.
    Eagle-Pandora Bus, Service to/from many major cities on the East Coast.
    Focus Travel Bus, Service to/from Philadelphia.
    Our Bus, ☎ +1 844 800-6828. Operates service to/from Washington DC, New Jersey, and Dewey Beach.
    Tripper Bus - service to/from Bethesda, MD; Arlington (Rosslyn), VA. Pickup location is at 7th Ave & 34th St at Penn Station & Madison Square Garden.
    Vamoose Bus - service between New York City Penn Station (7th Ave & W 30th St) and Bethesda, Maryland; Arlington, Virginia & Lorton, Virginia. Fares start at $30 each way.
    Washington Deluxe service to/from Washington DC. WiFi. From Washington DC, some to Brooklyn.
    [5] - Service to/from Washington DC, Baltimore.
    Executive Coach provides affordable and safe roundtrip bus charter service to New York City from local Pennsylvanian cities such as Lancaster, Hershey, and Harrisburg. We also provide service throughout the Continental United States and Canada.
    Martz Bus operates service to western Pennsylvania and Manhattan's Port Authority Bus Terminal on 8th Ave & 42nd St.
    Jet Bus, Luxury bus service with motion-canceling technology that eliminates 90% of bumps and vibration. Service to/from Washington DC.
    Susquehannabus Trailways goes to northern & central Pennsylvania.
    Trans Bridge Lines goes to Bethlehem, Allentown, Doylestown, etc. in Pennsylvania.
    Trailways goes up to various other places in New York state and to Montreal.
    C&J - Service to/from Boston, as well as smaller cities in New England such as Tewksbury, MA; Portsmouth, NH; and Ogunquit, ME
    Greyhound Lines offers connections across North America to/from the Port Authority Bus Terminal on 8th Ave & 42nd St. WiFi, electrical outlets.
    Coach USA. Coach USA also operates as Suburban, Shortline, Olympia, Red & Tan Line, and Rockland bus lines to other destinations in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Massachusetts, upstate New York, or Connecticut
    Peter Pan Bus operates between cities in the Northeast U.S. and the Port Authority Bus Terminal on 8th Ave & 42nd St.
    GOGO Charters New York provides private point-to-point New York charter bus rentals to and from any location in New York City.
    Easy Charter Bus Let Easy Charter Bus NYC take care of transportation during your NYC group trip. Whether you're traveling locally within the five boroughs or heading out of the Tri-State Area, there is no better choice for your shuttle, charter bus, or motorcoach rental than Easy Charter Bus.

By car

New York City - as you would expect - enjoys a prominent position on the US Interstate highway network. Although the city can be easily reached by car from anywhere in the nation, driving within the metropolitan area is an experience definitely not for the faint-hearted! It makes much more sense to use public transportation, but for those who insist on driving, the main routes into the New York City area are:

    I-78 from western New Jersey, the interior of Pennsylvania and beyond.
    I-80 is the main approach from much of the Midwest and Western United States; I-80 stretches across the continent from San Francisco, some 2,900 miles (4,700km) away on the opposite coast.
    I-87, the main approach from Upstate New York and Montreal, Canada.
    I-95 is the main route up the eastern seaboard of the United States, connecting Miami to the Canadian border. Realistically, the main destinations along I-95 which are within reasonable driving distance to New York are Boston (374km) to the north, Philadelphia (152km), Baltimore (302km), and Washington DC (364km) to the south.

By boat

New York City has always been one of the world's most important passenger sea ports, and arriving by ocean liner or cruise ship still remains an extraordinary and stylish method of arrival. In addition to passenger service from the Cunard Line, many cruise ships start or end their voyages in New York City.

    The Cunard Line operates regularly scheduled passenger service between the Brooklyn Cruise Terminal and Southampton, England as well as Hamburg, Germany aboard the RMS Queen Mary 2, the grandest, largest ocean liner ever built. The trip takes 6-7 days and costs $800-6,000 depending on the cabin and season.

Get around

Main article: New York City/Get around‎

"Left luggage"
Note that, due to security concerns, there are very few left luggage, storage lockers, or coat check services at any New York train station. This includes Penn Station and Grand Central Terminal; however the Amtrak checked luggage point at Penn Station is still operating, but only for ticketed passengers.

There are left luggage services in the Arrivals area of Terminals 1 and 4 at JFK Airport. The left luggage office in Terminal 4 is open 24 hours. There is also a luggage storage at Building 4 of JFK, which will require photo ID.

In Manhattan & Brooklyn there is Bounce Storage NYC, with fifty locations throughout the city - including close to Penn Station and Grand Central Terminal; their prices are $6 per 24 hour period. Also, there is Schwartz Travel & Storage, with three locations in Midtown Manhattan close to Penn Station is one of several left luggage services; the price per day is $7-10 per bag.

Some hotels will store luggage for customers who have checked out of the hotel.


Most of NYC is laid out in a grid. By convention, Manhattan is spoken of as if it runs north to south (it's actually northeast to southwest), with streets running east and west and avenues running north and south. This makes it relatively easy and straightforward to find your way. Streets are numbered (except in downtown Manhattan) and the numbering rises as you go north. Most avenues are numbered from east to west (so First Ave is east of Second, etc.) below 59th St. Building numbering on avenues starts at the south end of the avenue and rises as you move north, while building numbering on streets starts at Fifth Ave (for the most part - see below) and increases as you go east or west crosstown.

Above Washington Sq, Fifth Ave divides Manhattan into east and west; numbering starts at Fifth Ave on each side (except where Central Park interrupts) and increases in either direction. Addresses west of Fifth Ave are written as, for example, 220 W 34th St, while those east of Fifth Ave are written as 220 E 34th St. However, for numbered streets below Washington Sq (fortunately, there are only two, 3rd and 4th streets), Broadway divides the streets into East and West. Because of this dual-numbering system, it is always advisable to keep in mind the closest intersection to your destination (6th Ave and 34th St, Broadway and 51st, etc.). You might also see addresses written in a kind of shorthand in terms of the nearest crossing streets, for example "1755 Broadway b/w 56th & 57th" or "74 E. 4th b/w 2nd & Bowery." - along with the terms "uptown" and "downtown", this shorthand is almost a New York language which most visitors soon learn surreptitiously and start speaking themselves! In Greenwich Village and downtown Manhattan - generally considered as below Houston St ("HOW-ston") - all bets are off as streets meander, dead-end and intersect themselves. Streets in Greenwich Village are particularly notorious for defying logic. For instance, West 4th St intersects with West 10th St and West 12th St, and you can stand on the corner of Waverly Place and Waverly Place!

As a convenient guide to distance, there are 20 blocks per mile along the avenues (walking north/south). The average person can walk roughly 1 block per minute, or 60 blocks (3 mi) per hour. Walking east/west on the streets, blocks are generally much longer.

In Queens, avenues, roads, and drives generally run east/west and increase numerically as you proceed south. Streets run north/south. Queens and Northern Blvds run east/west.

The Bronx is a continuation of the Manhattan street numbers. 3rd Ave is the only numbered avenue in the Bronx.
On foot

For shorter distances, there is no better way of getting around New York than hitting the sidewalk. If you use the subway or buses, you will almost certainly need to walk to and from stations or stops. In all areas of New York a traveler is likely to visit, all streets have wide, smoothly-paved sidewalks. For long distances, walking is also fine and a great way to see the city.
Pedestrian Basics

Jaywalking is extremely common among New Yorkers; an average New Yorker typically jaywalks 10-15 times a day. However, it can be extremely dangerous. If you cannot properly gauge the speed of oncoming cars, it is recommended you wait for the walk signal. Do not blindly follow someone crossing, as while they might have time to make it across, the person behind them might not. If you do jaywalk, remember that in the US, people drive on the right side of the road on two-way streets so remember to look left to check for oncoming traffic on your side of the road. Be aware that many streets are one-way, so you may have to look left or right. Beware of bicyclists unlawfully going against the proper flow of vehicular traffic.

Remember that even if you have a walk signal, police cars, fire trucks, and ambulances can bypass red traffic lights. Always defer to these vehicles when walking.

    New York City Pedestrian Etiquette

        If you do not wish to jaywalk, be considerate of New Yorkers by not blocking them from jaywalking while you are waiting for your signal.
        It's New York City. It's crowded on those sidewalks – especially in Manhattan – so when someone accidentally bumps into someone else, it is not only acceptable, but generally expected, for one to say "Excuse me," or "I'm sorry." Be especially careful when you are carrying an umbrella to ensure that it does not catch a passer-by in the eye.
        Just like when driving, stay to the right (e.g. on subway staircases), let people pass if you are a slow walker, and don't stop suddenly or cut people off. If you are with a group, it is considered extremely poor etiquette to block the sidewalk without providing space for others to pass or overtake you.
        Texting (or, by extension, even reading texts) on one's cellphone while walking, is discouraged
        If you see someone who is in obvious distress, stop and offer to help them. Call 911 if necessary. NYC may be large, but it is still a relatively close-knit community, and New Yorkers generally take care of New Yorkers, visitors included.
        Keep your pets close by. Wandering pets can become a large problem on crowded NYC sidewalks. They can get in people’s way, and their leashes may become obstacles and entanglements to others.

Public Transit – Buses and Subways
MetroCard

OMNY allows passengers at all subway stations and on all MTA buses to pay by "tapping" their credit card or smart device that accepts Google Pay, Apple Pay, Samsung Pay or Fitbit Pay. If you tap in with a physical card the first time, to transfer, you can not use that card on a mobile wallet for the second tap: you must still use the physical card. OMNY uses a large reader module with an LCD display mounted to the front of the turnstiles. If you take 12 paid OMNY trips with the same device or card starting Monday, you’ll automatically ride free for the rest of the week through Sunday.

MetroCard is a pre-paid debit card for transit fares that will be phased out by 2024. MetroCards, which cost $1, can be bought online, at station booths, and at vending machines in subway stations. The vending machines in the stations accept credit cards; however, MetroCard vending machines will require that you type in your 5-digit zip code, or your regular PIN on international cards. You can add either value or time (i.e. unlimited trips) to your Metrocard at vending machines in stations. Unlimited Ride MetroCards may not be used in rapid succession at the same subway station or on the same bus route. MetroCards generally expire 1 year after purchase; the expiration date is printed on the back of the card at the upper left.

The PATH (Port Authority Trans-Hudson) subway system, which operates between New York and New Jersey, is not operated by the MTA and is therefore separate but with the same fare as the MTA. Even though PATH accepts payment by MetroCard, no free transfers are available - you have to swipe your MetroCard again to transfer from the PATH to the subway and vice versa. JFK AirTrain also accepts MetroCard, but again, is not operated by the MTA and no free transfers are available.

Metro-North Commuter Railroad, Long Island Rail Road (LIRR), New Jersey Transit (NJT) Buses, Trains, and Light Rail systems, and Amtrak trains do not accept MetroCard.
Fares

Up to three children 44 inches (112cm) tall ride for free on subways and local buses when accompanied by a fare paying adult.
=Transfers

    One free transfer is allowed during a two hour window immediately following a paid fare:

        From subway to local bus
        From local bus to subway
        From local bus to local bus (but not to any bus on the same route as the first)
        From express bus to subway
        From express bus to local bus
        From express bus to express bus (but not to any bus on the same route as the first)

    You can transfer from subway to subway as often as you like provided that you do not exit the subway system by leaving through a turnstile or gate. Many subway connections are possible in this way, by using in-station connections between the various lines. Indeed, the Guinness Book of World Records tracks the fastest times of groups that have tried to ride every single New York City subway train line on one fare - some have spent over 24 consecutive hours riding in the subway! Just remember that if you leave the subway and re-enter, you will be charged a second fare.

    Additionally, if you board a local bus and pay the $2.75 fare with a MetroCard, you can transfer to an express bus for the reduced price of $3.75 (instead of the standard $6.75 express bus fare).

    7-Day Express Bus Plus – costs $62 and allows unlimited use of not just local buses and subways, but also express buses. If you are staying in Staten Island, Queens, or Westchester county and plan to commute to the city during your visit, this pass may be advantageous to you.

    Also available are two passes good only for unlimited use of the JFK Airtrain: a 30-day unlimited AirTrain pass for $40, and a 10-trip pass for $25.

You can also get discounted tickets to certain events by showing your MetroCard when purchasing tickets.
By Subway
Map of the New York City Subway

Despite a (somewhat deserved) reputation for being dirty, the subway, which operates 24/7, is the fastest and best way to travel around the city. Fares are $2.90 (unless you use Single Ride MetroCard, which is $3.25), regardless of distance traveled. The much-feared subway crimes of the 1970s and 1980s are for the most part a thing of the past, and it is almost always completely safe. Just remember to use common sense when traveling late at night alone. Try to use heavily-traveled stations, remain visible to other people, and don't display items of value publicly. While violent crime is rare, petty crime - especially theft of iPhones and other expensive electronics - is more frequent, so be aware when using your phone on the train.
Subway basics

    To enter the subway, you will need to swipe your MetroCard through the slot on the right hand side of the turnstile that greets you at the subway entrance. Hold your card with the logo facing your body and black magnetic strip down. Then slide it forward through the slot at a moderate speed. You'll know you succeeded when the display flashes "Go" in green and then walk through turnstile Swiping the card improperly or moving the turnstile incorrectly could mean the forfeiture of your fare (for Pay-Per-Ride cards) or a lockout of 18 min (for Unlimited Ride cards). If this happens, go to a station booth and explain the problem. The agent will ask for your MetroCard, confirm that it was just charged, and let you go through (though many agents will simply accept your word and allow you through for expediency).
    Overhead signage next to each track indicates the train lines that stop at that particular track and the direction they are heading. In addition, the trains themselves are marked by signage that indicates their line. Subway stations are ventilated to the street, so they can be quite cold in the winter. In summertime, the stations can be much warmer than the outside temperature. The trains themselves are quite comfortable, but keep the temperature of stations in mind when planning your trip.
    Some lines are express, meaning that they skip local stations to provide faster service. Wherever there is an express train, there is also a local train that makes all stops. Local and express lines often use different tracks, which are marked on platforms and trains. For example, the 2 and 3 are the express trains for the 7th Ave Line between 96th St and Chambers St in Manhattan, while the 1 runs local alongside them.
    During weekends and late nights, certain trains do not operate, many express trains make local stops, and some subway entrances are closed. Detailed information is available on the MTA website. Additionally, maintenance work is usually concentrated on weekends and overnight. Notices of maintenance are also posted at stations to avoid unpleasant surprises. Remember, if you do feel confused, ask for help. Be aware that construction related service changes confuse many New Yorkers, so the best person to ask is a subway employee. The entire subway system is a massive, connected network,there will always be another way to get to your destination.

    A free subway map can be found online, or obtained at staffed station booths. Station agents can also assist you with directions. Even if not taking the bus, the free bus system maps for each borough double as fairly good street maps that show the exact location of every subway station. For the current subway status and delays, see SubwayStats.com, or RealMTA.info. Additionally, for convenience, subway maps are displayed in every station and on every train.

Route overview

Every subway line is identified by either a letter or a number. In midtown Manhattan, they are mostly grouped by color, but not always. However, lines are not identified by their color (e.g. "Blue Line"), but instead by letter/number (e.g. "A").

    The Lexington Ave Line trains (4, 5, 6) are essentially the only trains on the East Side above 23 St. Useful to get to the Metropolitan Museum of Art (4, 5, or 6 to 86th St Station or 6 to 77th St Station), Guggenheim Museum (4, 5, or 6 to 86th St Station), and other East Side museums. Also to get to the Statue of Liberty (4, 5 to Bowling Green Station), Chinatown (6 to Canal Street Station), and the Stock Exchange (4 and 5 to Wall St).

    The Seventh Ave Line (1, 2, 3) serves Broadway above 42nd St, and Seventh Ave below 42nd St. Useful to get to the West Village, Chelsea, and Tribeca neighborhoods as well as the Staten Island or Statue of Liberty ferries (1 to South Ferry Station) and Columbia University (1 to 116th Street Station).

    The Eighth Ave Line (A, C, E) serves Eighth Ave between 14th and 116th streets, then St. Nicholas Ave, Broadway, and Ft. Washington Ave starting at 125th St. in Harlem. Between 50th and 59th streets, the E branches off to Queens, and the B and D lines join the A and C lines for the journey uptown along Central Park West (the B and C make local stops). This section is useful to get to the Natural History Museum (B and C to 81st St Station), and Cloisters Museum (A to 190th St Station). Take an uptown E train or a Rockaway-bound A train for access to JFK Airport.

    The Sixth Ave Line (B, D, F, M) runs on 6th Ave from West 4th St to 47th-50th St and is useful for accessing the New York Public Library (42nd St), Rockefeller Center, Radio City Music Hall, and St. Patrick's Cathedral (47th-50th St).

    The Broadway Line (N, Q, R, W) runs down Broadway below 42nd St and on Seventh Ave and 59th St above Times Sq. The N, Q, R, and W trains are useful for accessing Chinatown (Canal St), SoHo/NoHo, NYU area, Union Sq (14th St), the Empire State Bldg (34th St), Times Sq (42nd St), Carnegie Hall (57th St), Central Park (57th St and 5th Ave stations) and the southern end of the Upper East Side. The R and W trains also go down to Financial District and South Ferry (Whitehall St). The Q train branches off and serves the new Second Avenue Line on the Upper East Side, ending at 96th St.

    The Nassau St line (J, Z) starts in the Financial District at Broad Street, then continues north to Essex Street and crosses the Williamsburg Bridge to Brooklyn and Queens. During rush hours, the J and Z operate skip-stop, bypassing alternate intermediate stations to speed up the trip.

    The Flushing Line (7), unofficially dubbed the "International Express", runs crosstown along 42nd St (making a good late-night alternative to the upstairs shuttle (see below)) and out to Queens, making stops in Filipino, South Asian, Hispanic, and Chinese/Korean neighborhoods, and also to Citi Field (replaced Shea Stadium in 2009) and the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center (home of the U.S. Open).

    The Canarsie Line (L) also runs crosstown along 14th St, then out to Canarsie in Brooklyn.

    The Crosstown Line (G) runs along most of Western Brooklyn and into Long Island City in Queens. At no point on its route does it stop in Manhattan.

    There are three Shuttles (indicated with an "S") throughout the system. The 42nd St Shuttle connects Times Sq on the West Side, with Grand Central Terminal on the East Side. The Franklin Ave shuttle in Brooklyn makes four stops at Fulton St (transfer to C), Park Pl, Botanical Gardens (transfer to 2,3,4, and 5), and Prospect Pk (transfer to B and Q). The Rockaway Shuttle runs alongside the A train between Broad Channel and Beach 116th St.

By PATH

PATH can be used to travel within Manhattan, from 33rd St along 6th Ave to Christopher St, and for less than the subway due to fare hike proposals from the MTA. It covers such a small territory but in theory you can use it if you have to travel its exact route. Unlimited Ride MetroCards cannot be used on the PATH. PATH also accepts the SmartLink Card (similar to the MetroCard, but the SmartLink Card cannot be used on the subway). PATH fare is $2.75, around the same price as the New York City Subway. The PATH train can be a great way to get around lower Midtown along 6th Ave. Like the subway, PATH operates 24/7. Usually, PATH trains arrive every 5-10 minutes (based on the time of day), but overnight, they may only come every 35 minutes.
By commuter rail

Commuter rail lines are mostly used for traveling between the city and its suburbs; however, they can be used for intra-city transit as well. A handful of destinations are closer to commuter rail stops but far from the subway. MetroCards are not accepted on commuter rail; separate single or period tickets must be bought. When purchasing commuter railroad tickets, it is advantageous to purchase them online or in railroad stations prior to boarding. While tickets are available for sale on trains, there is an on-board surcharge that makes them significantly more expensive.

The Long Island Railroad (LIRR) runs to/from Penn Station in Midtown Manhattan, Flatbush Avenue/Atlantic Avenue in Downtown Brooklyn, and has limited rush hour service to/from Long Island City, Queens. The Port Washington Branch goes to Northeast Queens which, aside from Flushing and Citi Field, is not served by the subway system. The Main Line, which contains most of the branches to the different parts of Long Island, goes to Southeastern Queens, including Jamaica, Laurelton, and Rosedale. The Atlantic Branch, which ends in Downtown Brooklyn, goes to East New York and Bedford-Stuyvesant, both in Brooklyn. This branch is not accessible from Manhattan, however. The LIRR is also the fastest way to get from JFK to Manhattan, Brooklyn, or Queens, and also runs to many popular getaways in Long Island, such as Long Beach, Port Jefferson, and Montauk. The LIRR has a somewhat deserved reputation for poor on-time performance, however this is more of a problem in the farther eastern reaches of the railroad and not so much a problem in New York City and its immediate suburbs.

The Metro-North Railroad provides services to/from Grand Central Terminal. Trains go to the Bronx and the northern suburbs of the city. The Hudson Line covers several parts of the Western Bronx, while the Harlem Line goes through the Central Bronx — an area with no subway service. It is the best way to get to Arthur Avenue and the New York Botanic Gardens. The Hudson and Harlem Lines are also your gateway to Westchester County and beyond, with the Hudson Line running all the way to Poughkeepsie. The New Haven Line runs to Connecticut, terminating, logically enough, in New Haven.
By bus
New York City bus

Even in Manhattan, with its dense subway network, buses can often be the best way of making a cross-town (i.e. east-west) journey, for example, crossing Central Park to go from the Metropolitan Museum to the Museum of Natural History. And outside peak hours, a ride by bus from the tip of Manhattan at Battery Park to Midtown is a good and cheap way of taking in the sights.
Bus basics

    Bus lines are identified by letters followed by numbers. The letters indicate the borough in which the line mostly operates (M=Manhattan; Bx=Bronx; B=Brooklyn; Q=Queens; S=Staten Island). Collectively, the letters and numbers make up the route (examples: M31, Bx9, M15). Signage at each bus stop indicates which buses stop there. Signage on the front of each bus indicates the route and destination of the bus. maps for each borough.
    Express buses travel between Manhattan and the outer boroughs, usually to areas where the subway doesn't operate (such as eastern Queens, the eastern Bronx, southeast Brooklyn, and Staten Island). They cost $6 but offer comfortable cloth seats and are less crowded than the subway and local buses. Most Express buses are identified with either "X" (X1, X2, X63, X68) or by the Borough they connect to Manhattan. So Expresses buses to and from the Bronx would be labeled BxM (BxM11, BxM18), to and from Brooklyn would be labeled BM (BM1, BM2), to and from Queens QM (QM1,QM2), and to and from Staten Island SIM (SIM1, SIM2). Keep in mind that several Brooklyn & Queens routes are also labeled with an "X" (the X27/37 and X28/38 go to Brooklyn, while the X63/64/68 go to Queens).
    When boarding a bus with a MetroCard, insert the card vertically, with the pin hole down, the black stripe to the right and the word "MetroCard" facing towards you, into the card slot in the top of the fare box next to the driver. You should be able to read the word "MetroCard" from bottom to top when inserting the card in this manner. The fare box will swallow the card, read it, and return it to you. Note this is different from the procedure to enter the subway described in "Subway Basics."
    Bus fare-boxes only accept nickels, dimes and quarters (no bills). As a safety precaution, drivers do not handle money. Change is not given, so exact fares must be paid. If you pay with coins and require a free transfer, you will have to ask the driver for one after you have paid.

    Certain north-south buses contain a small orange and purple card in the window that says "Limited." These limited buses do not make all local bus stops, but instead stop only at major cross streets. If a Limited bus skips your stop, you can wait for a local bus which will arrive soon. On some Avenues where there is at least two or more bus routes serving it, some bus routes may operate Limited on the entire avenue or at least until they branch off. For example along 3rd/Lexington Avenue, the M101 provides limited-stop service, while the M102 & M103 provide local service.

    +Select Bus Service+ also makes limited stops like the Limited buses described above, and costs the standard $2.75 fare. They appear on the Bx6, Bx12, & Bx41 in the Bronx, B44, B46, & B82 in Brooklyn, and M15, M23, M34 and M34A, M60, M79, & M86 in Manhattan, Q44, Q52, Q53, & Q70 LaGuardia Link in Queens, and S79 in Staten Island. They can be identified by front blinking blue desit on the front of the bus. However, these buses operate on a very different payment system. To board these +SBS+ buses, fares must be paid before boarding by using machines on the sidewalk near a special +SBS+ bus stop which is typically quite close to the local bus stop. Follow the instructions at the machine to pay. Once the fare has been paid, a receipt will be printed; take it and keep it with you. Once the bus arrives, you can enter through any door, but remember if you paid with cash to use the front door if you will need to ask the driver for a transfer. Fare inspectors will randomly check for your fare receipt as proof of payment; show it to them if they ask. If you don't have a valid receipt, you will be fined $100 or more so it is wise to always pay the fare. However, if you cannot buy the ticket successfully, such as due to a malfunctioning machine, note the machine number and report the problem to the bus driver near the front door at once. If the +SBS+ skips your stop, wait at the local bus stop for a local bus which will arrive soon.

    Buses across the city have a new feature called BusTime that allows you to see how far away the next bus is. It is available at bustime.mta.info.

By taxi

    Yellow cabs can be hailed in most of Manhattan and are available at dispatcher lines at airports, but are harder to find in the other four boroughs and Northern Manhattan where Green Boro taxis cruise. NYC taxis are yellow, have a metal seal on the hood ("medallion"), a roof-light with a taxi number, a meter for billing, stickers on the door stating "NYC T" and metered fare, special taxi license plates, and a partition inside the car. The previously ubiquitous Ford Crown Victoria sedan is slowly being phased out, although they still make up the majority on the roads - Toyota/Nissan hybrid sedans, and even some small SUVs and minivans are now commonplace. Yellow cabs have authority to take you anywhere within the city.
    Green Boro Cabs is found exclusively in the Bronx, Brooklyn, Queens, Staten Island, and northern Manhattan (north of East 96 St and north of West 110 St). They do not service southern Manhattan where yellow cabs predominate or any of the NYC airports. They will take passengers into Manhattan and the airports but will not pick up in these areas as their GPS meters will deactivate. Boro taxis are apple green, have a roof-light with a taxi number, a meter for billing, stickers on the door stating "NYC T Boro" and metered fare, special taxi license plates, and a partition inside the car.
    The fares are $2.50 plus a $0.50 state tax to start, plus $0.50 for each 1/5 mile traveled. There is a night surcharge 8PM-6AM of $0.50 and a rush hour surcharge of $1 from M-F 4PM-8PM. A trip between JFK Airport and Manhattan is a flat fare of $52.50. In addition, as in the rest of the United States, tipping your taxi driver is expected in New York. For more information, see Tipping in the United States. Info on fares, flat fares, group rides and rules. All yellow cabs accept VISA, MasterCard, and American Express for payment. In the unlikely event that the card reader is broken, the driver will let you know before you get into the taxi. To hail a taxi, stand visibly near the street (but away from moving traffic) with one arm raised over your head. The medallion numbers on the roof of the taxi will indicate the status of the taxi:
        If the medallion number is lit the taxi is available for hire.
        If the medallion number is unlit, then the taxi is already occupied or off-duty, but he or she may still pick you up if off-duty and you are traveling in the same direction as the driver. It's worth a try to hail it. However, a driver may still decline your fare even after stopping if you are going a different direction than them.
    Livery or Black Cars, known as car services or livery cabs, may only be called by phone, and are flat rate rather than metered. In most areas, they are not allowed to cruise the streets or airports for fares, although they will do so anyway. Ask for the fare in advance. Their license plates will say either "Livery" or "TLC" on the bottom.
        In some areas, livery cabs can be flagged on the street. Though this is technically illegal (the driver, not you, could get into trouble), it is useful in upper Manhattan and the outer boroughs and is accepted practice. The minimum fare in these cabs is about $7, and it is advisable to negotiate the fare before you get inside (again, tipping your driver is expected). Since yellow cabs are hard to come by in the outer boroughs, these cars are particularly useful for getting to the airport (your hotel can arrange one, or look up car services in the Yellow Pages).
    App-Based Taxi Services (also known as "ride share services" although in most cases you do not share the car with other fares) such as Uber and Lyft are extremely popular, and because drivers of livery car services often use them to find fares when their own dispatchers are idle, you can usually find a car in under 10 minutes even in the outer neighborhoods. Beware that most such services use variable-rate (AKA "surge") pricing and that prices will rise in response to even small increases in demand such as a concert ending: always provide a destination address to the app when requesting a car, and examine the estimated fare carefully! You will, obviously, need a smartphone capable of running the hailing app, and an active data connection in order to use these services: if you are roaming on an international phone this may be surprisingly expensive. You will also need to have previously set up the app to charge your credit card: these services do not accept cash payment for fares although tipping in cash is accepted.

Taxi Basics

    All licensed yellow and green taxis and sedan limousines are authorized to take three passengers in the backseat and one in the front seat for a total of four. However, some of the newer minivan and SUV yellow cabs can seat more passengers and may take more than four passengers (even though the licensed limit is posted in the cab). Larger than sedan limousines can be reserved, also useful for airport trips with lots of luggage, by calling any of the dozens of companies in the yellow pages.
    For all cabs, you must pay tolls for bridges, tunnels and highways. All cabs must use EZPASS automatic toll collectors which will display separately on the meter. Only pay the toll shown on the meter. Be careful of being overcharged by drivers for toll crossings—on bridges and tunnels (like the Queens-Midtown Tunnel or Triboro Bridge) rates are not posted in plain view. So, a crossing which actually cost the cab driver $5 is easily passed onto the unsuspecting passenger as a $10 charge. Outside the city, other than flat fare destinations and Newark Airport, meter rates are doubled (when going to Westchester or Nassau County). Tipping your driver is expected.
        For cabs summoned via a ride-hailing app (e.g. Uber, Lyft, Via), tolls are bundled into the fee charged to your credit card by the application, and do not need to be paid separately. You can also add the tip via the app although you will endear yourself to your driver if you tip in cash.
    Finding an available yellow cab can be difficult during the "shift change" times. Cabdrivers work 12-hour shifts, usually 5PM-5AM or 5AM-5PM. As a result, cabs are scarce 4PM-5PM, and 4AM-5AM. If you need to get to the airport during these times, calling a car service is a good idea.
    Knowing where cabdrivers want to go at various times of the day can help you find one. In the morning, drivers without a fare head for the Village and uptown to pick up commuters heading for Midtown and Wall Street. Hence if you are standing on the uptown side of Park Ave at 72nd St, for example, you will find more empty cabs (heading uptown) than if you are trying to hail one going downtown (towards midtown). The reverse is true during the afternoon rush hours. If you are in an outer borough, find a green cab or a yellow cab on a major road heading into Manhattan.
    NYC taxis MUST take you to any destination within the five boroughs. Yellow cab drivers often will not want to go to the outer boroughs (since it is hard to find fares there and they often have to return to Manhattan without one) but they are required to take you by law. If a driver refuses, you can call 311.
    Use NYC green boro taxis when traveling within the outer boroughs.
    Be wary of unlicensed cars (known derisively as "gypsy cabs") cruising for passengers, especially near the airports. While drivers may claim to offer you a cheaper rate than an actual taxi, your chances of actually getting this rate (not to mention getting to your destination safely and quickly) are less. If you are in doubt, ask an airport staffer for help finding a cab or cabstand. Major airports have taxi information cards for passengers.
    There are also bizarre van and shuttle services in different parts of the city. You will have to ask where it is going and how much it costs. Usually, you will see people lining up and some mysterious van will appear and they will board. There are services between Chinatown and Queens (you won’t have to make any transfers if it goes where you need to go!), and also there are separate services in Brooklyn, and Queens. Many of these services are branded as "Dollar Vans" (actually costing $2), and follow major bus routes along major avenues in these boroughs and will drop you off and pick up at any corner along the avenue. Some are legal while most aren't and usually compete with each other for customers and may cut some other van drivers off. This is an accepted practice in these boroughs and at times are faster than MTA buses. Most drivers of these vans have heavy West Indian accent. Some may seem sketchy but for the most part are people just trying to make a living. They are usually are helpful with directions. It is rare that incidents occur with them.

By pedicab

    New York Pedicab Services offers pedicab rides in the city.

By ferry

    The Staten Island Ferry, runs from Battery Park in southern Manhattan to Staten Island. The ferry carries passengers and bicycles only, runs every 30 minutes during rush hours, and is free (so don't be fooled by con artists trying to sell "advance tickets"). Not only does the ferry provide a means of transport, but it offers an amazing view of the Statue of Liberty and New York Harbor on its way. Even if you don't want to visit Staten Island, taking this trip is highly recommended and is very popular with tourists. Ride on the starboard side of the ferry (right side facing the front) from Manhattan and the port side from Staten Island for the best views (to the west). If you want to take good photographs, try to get on the ferry as soon as the gates open and walk briskly to an open window (few windows are open to the air and will populate quickly). The Manhattan-to-Staten Island route passes slightly closer to the Statue of Liberty than the return route.
    New York Waterway, operates ferries that connect the city with the New Jersey Hudson River Waterfront, and with points in Brooklyn and Queens. These ferries are not free. Inquire as to fares before boarding.
    SeaStreak, operates ferries that connect the city withthe New Jersey, and with Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket in the summer.
    NYC Ferry runs ferries between Manhattan and points in Queens and Brooklyn. One way tickets are $2.75 for Adults with an extra $1.00 surcharge for those who bring their bikes onboard and tickets can be either bought through the app or through ticket agents or ticket vending machines at the departure points.

By car
Brooklyn Bridge

A word of advice about driving in New York City: don't. A car is inadvisable — street parking is practically non-existent near crowded areas and tourist attractions, and garage parking rates range from very expensive to plain extortion. Traffic is almost always congested, parking rules are confusing, and many drivers are aggressive - as you will find out, Manhattan reverberates to the near constant sound of car horns being blown. The public transportation options are many and offer significant advantages and savings over driving a car. Many New Yorkers, particularly in Manhattan, don't own cars for this reason. If you are staying in a suburb and commuting to the city by car, think twice — driving to one of the Long Island Railroad, Metro North, or New Jersey Transit stations and taking the train into the city is a better option, and the parking fees at the station, train fare, and MetroCard combined are usually much cheaper than parking downtown. There are often secure parking areas in many stations. In Staten Island, parking near the ferry terminal and using the ferry will save you money and time.

If you do choose to drive, get a map, especially if driving outside of Manhattan. Good maps to use, if you are not driving, are the free bus maps which have each street, though the subway map can work in a pinch (also used for small boat navigation). In Queens, numbers identify not only avenues and streets, but also roads, places, crescents, and lanes, all of which might be near each other. Read the entire street sign. Outer borough highways are confusing and often narrowed to one lane, the potholes could trap an elephant, the signs are sometimes misleading, exits which should appear do not, and signs directing a highway approach drag you through miles of colorful neighborhood (in the wrong direction) before finally letting you onto the highway with a stop sign and six inches of merge space.

Traffic in New York City roughly follows a hierarchy of precedence, which is unwise to challenge. Fire engines, ambulances, and police cruisers are given priority, followed by other public service vehicles such as buses, road crews, and sanitation trucks. Beneath them are taxi cabs and delivery trucks. Below those are other cars. Note also that driving a car with out-of-state license plates (save for perhaps Connecticut or New Jersey) will instantly mark you as an outsider, sometimes resulting in other drivers being more aggressive around you than they would with a local. Suffice it to say, driving in New York is not for the timid, fearful, or otherwise emotionally fragile.
Car rental

The major car rental agencies have offices throughout the city. Smaller agencies are also well represented. Be warned that car rentals in New York are generally more expensive than elsewhere in the United States, and frequently require a deposit of up to $500, if you do not have a credit card. Insurance rates also tend to be higher in New York than in most other cities.
Gas/Petrol stations

Gas stations are few and far between, especially in Manhattan, where only a handful exist around the perimeter of the island. Be prepared to up to $0.50 more per gallon than in the surrounding suburbs or New Jersey. Therefore, if you have the option, it is best to fill your car while you aren't in NYC, as long as you have enough gas to last!
Points of entry

There are several points of entry/exit into the city from the New Jersey side: the Lincoln Tunnel (midtown/41st Street), the Holland Tunnel (downtown/Canal St), and the George Washington Bridge (way uptown/178th St) — all are accessible from the New Jersey Turnpike (I-95). I-78 east will also feed directly into the Holland Tunnel (US-1/9 is also a popular route). I-80 east will terminate at an I-95 junction, the north route of which will lead directly to the George Washington Bridge. The bridge is also directly accessible from US-46 east. With all of these options, many commuters choose to listen to 24 hour traffic reports on AM stations 880 (every ten minutes on the 8's) and 1010 (every ten minutes on the 1's) to find the least congested route at that time. Weekend traffic delays can easily exceed 60 minutes at some of the tunnels, so plan accordingly!

The Midtown Tunnel under the East River is convenient for Long Island travelers, as it becomes the Long Island Expressway. The Queensborough Bridge (aka The 59th Street Bridge) also crosses the East River into Queens, is toll-free, and lands near the mouth of the Midtown Tunnel but requires some automotive manipulation to get onto the Long Island Expressway. Other routes head north and east out of the Bronx, including Interstates 87 (north to Albany) and 95 (northeast to Boston) and the Henry Hudson Parkway, which is along the Hudson River.
Toll charges

Toll charges are very expensive for some crossings – mostly to New York from New Jersey, and to Staten Island from New York. The Port Authority [6] has increased the tolls for New York/New Jersey crossings to a whopping $15, and it's cheaper if the toll is paid by E-ZPass (which is an electronic toll collection system used throughout the Northeastern/Midwestern US). Eventually, it will increase until 2016 and there was some criticism for how that money was used. The MTA [7] is more different. The Verrazano-Narrows Bridge cost $15, and most crossings cost $7.50 or less. Be advised that there are traffic delays as well, sometimes lasting up to an hour.

Keep in mind that many toll roads, bridges, and tunnels in New York (particularly those operated by the MTA and the New York Thruway Authority and some operated by the Port Authority such as the Queens-Midtown Tunnel (I-495), Brooklyn–Battery Tunnel (I-478), Triborough Bridge (I-278), Verrazano–Narrows Bridge (I-278), Goethals Bridge (I-278), Outerbridge Crossing (NY 440), Bayonne Bridge (NY 440), Bronx–Whitestone Bridge (I-678), Throgs Neck Bridge (I-295), New York Thruway (I-87), and New England Thruway (I-95), etc) have switched to an all electronic system in 2017 for all toll roads, bridges, and tunnels. Users who do not have an EZ-Pass have a picture of their license plate taken and are sent a bill in the mail. Visitors who do not have an EZ-Pass or are renting a car are recommended to set up an invoice account. Those who wish to pay tolls in cash are recommended to visit a MTA customer service center.

On the other hand, many of the crossings (in particular all three Hudson River crossings) are only tolled going into New York City.
Rush hour traffic

Traveling at off-hours makes sense to avoid rush hour traffic, but highways and roads are still generally packed any time of day. The Cross Bronx Expressway, which is part of I-95 and leads to the George Washington Bridge, is almost always choked with traffic. Expect traffic jams at 1-2am. The Long Island Expressway has heavy eastbound traffic between the morning and evening rushes. The Holland and Lincoln Tunnels are 10 minute waits on a good day. The Brooklyn-Queens Expressway (BQE) is notorious, and an accident on the Verazzano Bridge without shoulders can cause a backup all the way through the northern part of Staten Island into New Jersey. It is a good idea to check radio traffic reports, especially before crossing a bridge or tunnel. Three different stations have reports every 10 minutes around the clock: 880 AM (on the 8's), 1010 AM (on the 1's), and 1130 AM (on the 5's).

Driving cross-town (east-west) in Manhattan during rush hours is especially troublesome because the traffic lights are optimized to move traffic along the north-south roads. Your best bet is to avoid driving in Midtown Manhattan (between the 30s and 50s) whenever possible. If you do drive in Midtown Manhattan cross-town, posted Midtown Thru Streets [8] may reduce delays.
Traveling with a commercial vehicle

If you are traveling with a commercial vehicle, such as a moving truck, remember that commercial traffic is prohibited on many roadways throughout the city. Commercial traffic is permitted only on multiple-lane roadways designated as "expressways" (such as the Long Island Expressway, Cross-Bronx Expressway, or Brooklyn-Queens Expressway) and the surface streets unless marked otherwise. Commercial traffic is prohibited on all multiple-lane roadways designated as "parkways" (such as the Grand Central Parkway, Cross-Island Parkway, or Henry Hudson Parkway) with frequent low bridges. [9] Unfortunately, the majority of fast-moving roadways are designated as parkways in New York City. Commercial traffic is also prohibited on the Franklin Delano Roosevelt (FDR) Drive in Manhattan. The only viable option for traveling with a commercial vehicle in Manhattan is the surface streets, but always look out for low vertical clearance. Commercial vehicles have exclusive metered parking in Midtown Manhattan and are prohibited from parking overnight on any city street.
Garage Parking

Parking in garages or outdoor lots is usually very expensive, costing as much as $40 per day in Manhattan, although cheap or free lot parking is available at some times at certain locations. Street parking can be free or much cheaper than garage or lot parking, but can be extremely hard to come by. In Manhattan, self-park (or "park-and-lock") is extremely rare. The overwhelming majority of parking facilities in Manhattan have mandatory valet parking, so you must set aside a few dollars for tips, and anticipate the time it will take for a valet to retrieve your vehicle. Self-park garages in Manhattan conveniently located near major tourist attractions include the Battery Parking Garage in Lower Manhattan, Manhattan Plaza Parking in Midtown Manhattan, and the public parking garage underneath the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

In the case of parallel parking on the street, "bumping" cars in front of and behind of you to get into and out of a parking spot (known to some as "Braille Parking") is common. If you choose to park on the street, don't be surprised if you find a few new scratches and scrapes on your bumper.

As a general rule, hotels in New York do not supply garage parking. The few that do will charge you handsomely for the privilege.

There are several websites and mobile apps that can help you find and book parking, including: ParkMe.com, SpotHero, PrimoSpot.com, ParkFast.com, ParkWhiz.com, DiscountNYCParking.com, BestParking.com, Parkopedia.com, IconParking.com, ParkFast.com, NYC Parking Authority, and Parking Panda.
Street Parking - Rules and penalties for violation

    Check all parking signs carefully. Parking meters demand constant feeding, and are hungry late into the night in some areas. All are pay-and-display meters which accept coins and credit cards. Meters are for 1-2-3 hour duration and in effect from morning to night except on Sunday. If a meter is broken, you must walk to a working meter and purchase a receipt. Most of Midtown Manhattan is metered parking for trucks only. [http://www.nyc.gov/html/dot/html/faqs/faqs_traffic.shtml Parking is illegal at ALL bus stops and within 15 feet (4.5 m) of fire hydrants. Yellow lines on the curb have no legal meaning in NYC, so they cannot be relied upon to tell you if you are parked far enough from a hydrant. That said, in most areas the seams in the sidewalk are roughly five feet apart, so leaving at least three "squares" of sidewalk between the hydrant and your bumper is a smart move. Many motorists simply pay garage fees to avoid the anxiety of finding a parking spot and the risks of expensive parking tickets.

    New York has "street cleaning" parking rules [10], which may require drivers to move their cars at different times of the day (such as early morning, or overnight in a few business districts) so that street sweepers can clean the roads. Street cleaning rules are suspended on many obscure holidays, while parking meters and other hourly restrictions are only suspended on a few major holidays (not even on all Federal holidays).

    Trying to leave a car parked illegally for very long will often end with a $150 fine, and a vehicle illegally parked in an overcrowded place is very likely to be towed away and face a $300 fine. The New York Police Department operates the tow pounds [11].

Important Rules While Driving

    NYC law speed limits are 25 mph unless otherwise noted by a sign.

    NYC law prohibits drivers from turning right on red. Elsewhere in the state it is legal after a full stop unless posted otherwise.

    As in the rest of New York State, talking on a cell-phone (without a hands-free device) or texting while driving is illegal. Even if you do have a hands-free device, minimize your talking and prioritize driving.

    There are red light cameras at 100 various intersections in New York City. [12]. A camera will take a picture if you run a red light and a fine disputable on the web will be issued in 30 days.[13] However, since the camera does not identify who is driving the vehicle, no points will be issued against your drivers' license.

    Some bus lanes have video cameras.[14] A camera will take a video if you drive illegally in the bus lane other than to turn right and a fine disputable on the web will be issued in 30 days.[15]

    There are 20 to 40 speed limit cameras in the city located near schools.

    If there is an emergency vehicle trying to get through with its siren blaring, pull over to the side and move forward as necessary.

    Some avenues and many streets have only one-way traffic. Thankfully, one-way streets generally alternate direction, so if your destination is down a one-way street going in the wrong direction, go another block and double-back. A handy mnemonic is "Evens go East," meaning that, for the most part, streets with even numbers will head east, and vice-versa (in Manhattan). The best gauge to determine a one way street's direction is to check the direction parked cars face.

    Be wary of your surroundings when you park your car. While NYC is a safe city for its size, it's not necessarily safe for your car as well. Make it as unworthy to steal as possible.

By bicycle

New Yorkers have been using bikes more and more over recent years. The city is equipped with bike lanes in some places, of which you can find a map here.

You can check the official NYC recommendations for cyclists here.

Citi Bike, launched in 2013, is now the country's largest bike sharing program. It now counts with more than 600 stations.
See

Like most of the great world cities, New York has an abundance of great attractions - so many, that it would be impossible to list them all here. What follows is but a sampling of the most high-profile attractions in New York City; more detailed info can be found in the district pages.

Many tourist attractions in New York City offer free or discounted admission on certain days, eg Museum of Modern Art's Free Friday, or Museums on Us® program by Bank of America.

A number of multi-attraction schemes give reduced prices and line-skipping privileges:

    Explorer Pass allows you to choose 3, 4, 5, 7, or 10 top attractions to visit. Cardholders have 30 days to use the card after visiting the first attraction. Attractions to choose from include Top of the Rock Observation, Rockefeller Center Tour, Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island, Museum of Modern Art, Metropolitan Museum of Art, movie tours, cruises, and more. Also included with the card are shopping, dining, and additional attraction discounts. Beware of buying this pass as it is quite more expensive than most of the things it allows you to do. For example, Rockefeller Tour and Top of the Rock together cost ~42 USD, while this pass counts it as **2** attractions. Another example Museum of Modern Art ticket costs 25 USD.
    New York CityPASS grants admission to 6 New York attractions within 9 days of first use for a much reduced rate. The attractions are Empire State Building; Metropolitan Museum of Art and same-day admission to The Cloisters; American Museum of Natural History; Museum of Modern Art (MoMA); Option Ticket One with choice of either Top of the Rock™ Observation Deck or Guggenheim Museum; Option Ticket Two with choice of either a Circle Line Sightseeing Cruise or Statue of Liberty & Ellis Island. $106 adult, $79 youth aged 6–17.
    New York Pass, [16]. Grants access to over 50 top attractions with line skipping privileges. Passes are available for 1 day ($127 adult, $94 child), 2 days ($189 adult, $149 child), 3 days ($273 adult, $154 child) or 7 days ($375 adult, $260 child). Remember, you must obtain a ticket in each attraction. You can visit as many attractions as you want in the time period - the more attractions you visit, the more you save. Also includes a free 140 page guide book, but is much better to organize your visits previously, via internet.
    The New York Sightseeing Pass includes free admission to more than 50 top sights, famous museums and interesting tours by bus and boat and features even further discounts. The pass allows saving money and time with skip the line priorities to selected sights such as the One World Observatory, Madame Tussauds and a tour to the Statue of Liberty. The Sightseeing Pass is available for periods of 1, 2, 3, 5 and 7 days (from $99,00 to $289,00 for adults) and comes with a practical New York City map.

See also the district pages for detailed information about attractions. Detail should be moved from this page to the district pages.

    OnBoard New York Tours (NYC Tours), 1650 Broadway (50th & 7th Avenue), ☎ 212-852-4821, [x]. Sightseeing Bus and Walking Tours of New York City. Varies.
    Zip Aviation Helicopter Tours, Pier 6, East River (Downtown R Train, Whitehall Stop), ☎ 866ZIPOVER, [x]. 9A-7P. Zip Aviation offers three different helicopter tours of New York City and operates out of the Downtown Manhattan Heliport on Pier 6, East River side. $145.
    City Sightseeing New York, 455 12th Avenue, New York, NY 10018, ☎ (212) 445-7599, [x]. 9A-7P. City Sightseeing New York provides hop on, hop off boat tours on New York City harbor.
    CitySights NY, 234 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036, ☎ (212) 812-2700, [x]. 9A-7P. CitySights NY operates hop on, hop off bus tours in New York City. Our fleet of double decker top seating buses will provide you with the best view of skylines in NYC.
    NYC Insider Guide, [x]. Independent guide to monthly events, attractions, tours, free things to do and see, activities, kids and more.
    Lokafy, ☎ 1-800-943-9145, [x]. Lokafy connects you with a local who is passionate about exploring the hidden gems in New York City. It's just like having a friend show you around the city. $15 an hour per person.
    Greenwich Village Literary Pub Crawl, 567 Hudson Street (1 Train to Christopher Street), ☎ 9178654575, [x]. 11-4. Literary themed walking tour and pub crawl of Greenwich Village. One of the oldest and quirkiest tours of the village, and one of the best researched. 30. 

Landmarks
Statue of Liberty
Manhattan skyline

Manhattan possesses the lion's share of the landmarks that have saturated American popular culture. Starting in Lower Manhattan, perhaps the most famous of these landmarks is easy to spot - the Statue of Liberty, a symbol of the nation standing atop a small island in the harbor, and perhaps also the most difficult attraction to access in terms of crowds and the long lines to see it. Nearby Ellis Island preserves the site where millions of immigrants completed their journey to America. Within Lower Manhattan itself, Wall Street acts as the heart of big business being the home of the New York Stock Exchange, although the narrow street also holds some historical attractions, namely Federal Hall, where George Washington was inaugurated as the first president of the United States. Nearby, the National September 11 Memorial at the World Trade Center Site commemorates the victims of that fateful day. The 1776 foot tall One World Trade Center is the spiritual successor to the fallen Twin Towers and is now the tallest skyscraper in both New York and the United States. Connecting Lower Manhattan to Downtown Brooklyn, the Brooklyn Bridge offers fantastic views of the Manhattan and Brooklyn skylines.

Moving north to Midtown, Manhattan's other major business district, you'll find some of New York's most famous landmarks. The Empire State Building looms over it all as the second-tallest building in the city, with the nearby Chrysler Building also dominating the landscape. Nearby is the headquarters of United Nations overlooking the East River and Grand Central Terminal, one of the busiest train stations in the world. Also nearby is the main branch of the New York Public Library, a beautiful building famous for its magnificent reading rooms and the lion statues outside the front door; and Rockefeller Plaza, home to NBC Studios, Radio City Music Hall, and (during the winter) the famous Christmas Tree and Skating Rink.

Still in the Midtown area but just to the west, in the Theater District, is the tourist center of New York: Times Square, filled with bright, flashing video screens and LED signs running 24 hours a day. Just to the north is Central Park, with its lawns, trees and lakes popular for recreation and concerts.

Head down to Tribeca to see one of the most unique New York City landmarks, the Staple Street sky bridge. Located on one of New York City's smallest streets, the Staple Street sky bridge dates back to 1907, when it was built to connect two buildings that were part of New York Hospital. After the hospital moved, the bridge remained. Today, the bridge connects two lofts, with separate addresses, but are being sold together to create the most unique 5 bedroom, 5 bathroom, 1 sky bridge loft in New York City! Listing price? A cool $35 million.
Museums and galleries

New York has some of the finest museums in the world. All the public museums, which are run by the city, accept donations for an entrance fee, but private museums, especially the Museum of Modern Art, can be very expensive. The Metropolitan Museum of Art no longer accepts donations from visitors who are not residents of New York State. In addition to the major museums, hundreds of small galleries are spread throughout the city, notably in neighborhoods like Chelsea and Williamsburg. Many galleries and museums in New York close on Mondays, so be sure to check hours before visiting. The following is just a list of highlights; see district pages for more listings.
Arts and culture

New York City is home to some of the finest art museums in the country, and in Manhattan, you'll find the grandest of them all. The Metropolitan Museum of Art in Central Park has vast holdings that represent a series of collections, each of which ranks in its category among the finest in the world. Within this single building you'll find perhaps the world's finest collection of American artwork, period rooms, thousands of European paintings including Rembrandts and Vermeers, the greatest collection of Egyptian art outside Cairo, one of the world's finest Islamic art collections, Asian art, European sculpture, medieval and Renaissance art, antiquities from around the ancient world, and much, much more. As if all that wasn't enough, the Metropolitan also operates The Cloisters, located in Fort Tryon Park in Upper Manhattan, houses a collection of medieval art and incorporates elements from five medieval French cloisters and other monastic sites in southern France in its renowned gardens.

Near the Metropolitan, in the Upper East Side, is the Guggenheim Museum. Although more famed for its architecture than the collection it hosts, the spiraling galleries are ideal for exhibiting art works. Also nearby is the Whitney Museum of American Art, with a collection of contemporary American art. In Midtown, the Museum of Modern Art(MoMA), holds the most comprehensive collection of modern art in the world, and is so large as to require multiple visits to see all of the works on display, which include Van Gogh's Starry Night and Picasso's Les Demoiselles d’Avignon, as well as an extensive industrial design collection. Midtown is also home to the Paley Center for Media, a museum dedicated to television and radio, including a massive database of old shows. Unknown to some Harlem, previously known as the black mecca of the Americas, is the home of important landmarks of New York City such as the Apollo Theater and 125th. You will also find the Studio Museum and contemporary art galleries such as Tatiana Pagés Gallery.

In Brooklyn's Prospect Park, the Brooklyn Museum of Art is the city's second largest art museum with excellent collections of Egyptian art, Assyrian reliefs, 19th-century American art, and art from Africa and Oceania, among other things. Long Island City in Queens is home to a number of art museums, including the PS1 Contemporary Art Center, an affiliate of the Museum of Modern Art, and the Museum of the Moving Image, which showcases movies and the televisual arts.
Science and technology

In New York City, no museum holds a sway over children like the American Museum of Natural History in Manhattan's Upper West Side. Containing the Hayden Planetarium, incredible astronomy exhibits, animal dioramas, many rare and beautiful gems and mineral specimens, anthropology halls, and one of the largest collections of dinosaur skeletons in the world, this place offers plenty of stunning sights.

Near Times Square in the Theater District, the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum takes up a pier on the Hudson River, with the aircraft carrier Intrepid docked here and holding some incredible air and space craft.

Over in the Flushing district of Queens, on the grounds of the former World's Fair, is the New York Hall of Science, which incorporates the Great Hall of the fair and now full of hands-on exhibits for kids to enjoy.

Another standout museum is the Transit Museum located in an abandoned station in Downtown Brooklyn. The old subway cars are a real treat and the museum is a must if you're in New York with kids (and well-worth it even if you're not).
Neighborhoods

Like all great cities, New York is made up of distinct neighborhoods, each of which has its own flavor. Many of the neighborhoods are popular with visitors, and all are best experienced on foot. See individual borough pages (Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens, Bronx , and Staten Island) for a comprehensive listing of neighborhoods.
Parks
Gate to the Shakespeare garden at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, one of the best places to visit in New York City!

Though the image many people have of Manhattan is endless skyscrapers and packed sidewalks, the city also boasts numerous lovely parks, ranging from small squares to the 850-acre Central Park, and there are worthwhile parks in every borough. From the views of the New Jersey Palisades from Fort Tryon Park in Upper Manhattan, to the grand Pelham Bay Park in The Bronx, and the famous Flushing Meadow Park in Corona, Queens, site of the U.S. Open Tennis Tournament, there is more than enough to keep any visitor busy. And almost any park is a great spot to rest, read, or just relax and watch the people streaming past. To find out more about New York City parks, look at the New York City Department of Parks & Recreation website and the WikiTravel pages for each borough.

Note that except for special events, all NYC parks are closed 1AM–6AM. Also, as a reminder to youngsters, it is illegal to climb trees in the park in New York City.
Do

A general word of advice on sightseeing in New York:

Tourists often spend their entire vacation in New York standing in line (or as New Yorkers say, "standing on line"). This is often unnecessary; there are usually alternatives. For example, one can choose to avoid the Empire State Building during the day (it is open, and empty, late, until midnight or 2AM on weekends during summer), skip the Statue of Liberty in favor of the Staten Island Ferry, and stay away from the Guggenheim on Monday (it is one of the only museums open that day). Also, there is no reason to stand in line for a Broadway show if you already have a ticket with an assigned seat. If you prefer, get a drink nearby and come back closer to curtain time, when you can walk right in. The lines for bus tours can be absurd because tourists all seem to have the exact same itinerary - which is get on a bus in the morning in Times Square, get off for the Statue of Liberty, and finish on the East Side in the afternoon. Why not go downtown in the morning, and save Midtown for the afternoon? You will thank yourself for avoiding the crowds. Also, understand that buses are the slowest way to go crosstown in Midtown Manhattan during peak hours, and taxis are not much better. You are often better off either on foot or taking the subway.

Two tips for smart tourists, who realize that subway and foot tours are the way to go:

First, before you even leave your hotel, download a Google Map of New York City, including subways. This will let you keep track of your subway progress and make changes on the fly, even when you are without cell service on the subway.

Second, rather than sit on a bus going 3 MPH throughout New York City, take the subway to your preferred neighborhood and take a walking tour. There are a plethora of walking tour companies that will get you to all the spots you want to see within 2-3 hours. And since there are multiple walking tour companies, the prices are low! You shouldn't expect to pay any more than $30 - $35 for a 2-3 hour tour.
Entertainment
Theater and Performing Arts

New York's Broadway is famous for its many shows, especially musicals. You might want to visit TKTS online, which offers tickets for shows the same night at discounted prices, usually 50% off or visit BroadwayBox.com or NYTix.com, both community sites posting all recent Broadway discounts. TKTS has two offices, one at Times Square with lines often hours long, and a much faster one (sometimes minutes) at South Street Seaport (Corner of John St, just south of Brooklyn Bridge). Only cash is accepted at South Street. Show up at opening time for best selection. Tickets to most Broadway shows are also available from the Broadway Concierge and Ticket Center, inside the Times Square Visitor Center. They offer restaurant and hotel recommendations, parking help, and other services in addition to ticket sales, available in several languages.

New York boasts an enormous number and variety of theatrical performances. These shows usually fall into one of three categories: Broadway, Off-Broadway, or Off-Off-Broadway. Broadway refers to the shows near Times Square that usually play to theaters of 500 seats or more. These include the major musicals and big-name dramatic works, and are the most popular with visitors. Tickets for Broadway shows can run to $130 a seat, though discounters like TKTS (above) make cheaper seats available. Off-Broadway indicates performances that are smaller (less than 500 seats) and usually of a certain intellectual seriousness. Some of these theaters are located around Times Square in addition to different locations throughout Manhattan. Tickets to Off-Broadway shows tend to range from $25–50. Off-Off-Broadway refers to those shows that play to very small audiences (less than 100 seats) with actors working without equity. These can be dirt cheap and often very good, but some may be sufficiently avant-garde as to turn off conservative playgoers. Off-Off-Broadway Theaters worth checking out are Rising Sun Performance Company, Endtimes Productions, and The People's Improv Theater.

For current and upcoming Broadway and Off-Broadway info and listings, visit Playbill.com. This site also has lots of articles on what's going on in the NY commercial theater scene. Broadway.com and Newyorkcitytheatre.com also has plenty of info, as well as some videos and photos. Theatermania has many discounts to the bigger shows, and also provides listings for the Off-Off scene. If visiting in the summer, brave the huge lines and attempt to get tickets to the Public Theater annual "Shakespeare in the Park," which often features big-time stars of stage and screen. Meryl Streep, Kevin Kline, Natalie Portman, and Liev Schrieber are just a few of the actors to have appeared here in recent years. Oh, and it's free. Just get to one of the box offices ridiculously early, especially the one at the Park.

It's possible to purchase tickets to The Tony Awards, Broadway's biggest award ceremony and the culmination of the theatrical season in the city. These aren't cheap, but if you're into the theater scene and know something about the various performers being honored, it can be an exciting night. In any case, the performances are always fun, and you can catch moments that aren't in the broadcast. Always the first or second Sunday night in June, visit The Tony Awards website for the most current details.

New York has a wide variety of musical and dance companies, including several that are among the world's most renowned. There are also numerous small companies putting on more idiosyncratic shows every night of the week. The following are just a few of New York's most high-profile music and dance options.

    Brooklyn Academy of Music(BAM), 30 Lafayette Avenue, Brooklyn. Home to the impressive Brooklyn Philharmonic, BAM is one of the best places in the country to attend cutting-edge new musical and dance performances. The Next Wave Festival every autumn is a much-anticipated event of the New York performance scene.

    Carnegie Hall, 881 Seventh Avenue. The premier venue for classical music in the United States, Carnegie Hall is famous around the world for its dazzling performances. Playing at Carnegie Hall is, for many classical musicians, the epitome of success. Carnegie Hall houses three different auditoriums, with the Isaac Stern auditorium being the largest venue.

Subway: N, Q, or R to 57th Street-7th Avenue.

    Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, at Alice Tully Hall in Lincoln Center, 155 W 65th St (at Broadway). The Chamber Music Society is the most prestigious chamber music ensemble in the United States, playing in the acoustically impeccable Alice Tully Hall.

    Metropolitan Opera at Metropolitan Opera House in Lincoln Center, 155 W 65th St (at Broadway). The Met (as it is known) is one of the greatest opera companies in the world. The company performs six days a week (Monday-Saturday) during the season (Sep-Apr), and always lands the greatest singers from around the globe. Expect to pay a small fortune for the most expensive seats, but upper-tier seats can cost as little as $25.

Subway: 1 to 66th Street-Lincoln Center

    New York City Ballet at New York State Theater in Lincoln Center, 155 W 65th St (at Broadway). Founded by George Balanchine, the New York City Ballet is among the world's best dance companies. Their performances of the The Nutcracker, during the holiday season, are enormously popular.

    New York Philharmonic at Avery Fisher Hall in Lincoln Center, 155 W 65th St (at Broadway). One of the premier orchestras in the United States, playing a wide variety of concerts (more than 100) every year to sold-out crowds, the Philharmonic is well-known for its standard-setting performances of the classical canon. The season runs from September to June, and in the summer they play free concerts in parks around the city [17].

    Radio City Music Hall, 1260 Avenue of the Americas, +1-212-632-3975, [18]. See the Rockettes, another show or just tour the famous Art Deco masterpiece.

Film

New York is one of the world's greatest film cities, home to a huge number of theaters playing independent and repertory programs. Many major US studio releases open earlier in New York than elsewhere (especially in the autumn) and can be found at the major cineplexes (AMC, United Artists, etc.) around the city. As with everything else in New York, movies are quite popular, and even relatively obscure films at unappealing times of the day can still be sold out. It's best to get tickets in advance whenever possible.

As many films premiere in New York, you can often catch a moderated discussion with the director or cast after the show. Sometimes even repertory films will have post-screening discussions or parties. Check listings for details.

In addition to the more than 15 commercial multiplexes located throughout the city, some of the more intriguing New York film options include:

    Film Forum 209 W Houston St. A stylish theater in Greenwich Village that runs two programs—contemporary independent releases and classic repertory films. While the current releases are almost always interesting and worth seeing, it's the repertory programming schedule that filmlovers anticipate eagerly.

    American Museum of the Moving Image 35th Ave and 36th St, Queens. AMMI contains a museum devoted to, literally, moving images, so visitors will find exhibits on zoetropes and video games in addition to film and television. It also puts on a terrific screening program, with films showing continuously throughout the day.

    Angelika Film Center 18 W Houston St at Broadway, +1-212-995-2000, [19]. Just down the street from Film Forum, the Angelika plays new independent and foreign films, many of which are only screened in New York. The cafe upstairs is something of a hotspot as well.

Subway: N or R to Prince Street.

    Anthology Film Archives, 32 Second Ave (at E 2nd St), [20]. A varied program of unique films, both repertory and new, most playing for only one or two screenings. Many of the films shown here can't be seen anywhere else (for better or worse). It also plays host to several film festivals yearly. Subway: F to 2nd Avenue-Lower East Side

    Cinema Village On 22 E 12th St between University Place and Fifth Ave, +1-212-629-5097, [21] Cinema Village specializes in showing documentaries, independent and foreign films. Often the films there will not be playing anywhere else in the country and Q&As with directors are common at opening weekends.

    Film Society at Lincoln Center Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, 155 W 65th St (at Broadway), [22]. The Film Society always puts on a terrific repertory program and shows a wide variety of experimental and foreign films. In addition, numerous talks and panels are held here, many featuring bold-named directors, screenwriters, and actors.

    MoMA 11 West 53rd Street. In addition to being the crown jewel of modern art museums, MoMA puts on a terrific repertory program in a nicely renovated theater below the museum. And compared to other New York movie theaters, tickets to films at MoMA are a steal.

    New York Film Festival at Lincoln Center. Running in October, the New York Film Festival is one of the country's best, with great films from around the world accompanied by interesting discussions, lectures, and panels. Be advised that tickets usually sell out at least a month in advance.

    Tribeca Film Festival. Throughout May the movie theaters of Lower Manhattan are taken over by the Tribeca Film Festival, which puts on a truly enormous amount of screenings and talks. Just a few years old, the Tribeca Film Festival has already secured a prominent place in New York's film calendar.

Parades

New York City hosts many parades, street festivals and outdoor pageants. These are some of the most famous:

    New York's Village Halloween Parade. Each Halloween (31 Oct) at 7PM. This parade and street pageant attracts 2 million spectators and 50,000 costumed participants along Sixth Ave between Spring St and 21st St. Anyone in a costume is welcome to march; those wishing to, should show up 6PM-9PM at Spring St and 6th Ave.

    Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade. The morning of each Thanksgiving on Central Park W, this parade attracts many spectators and is broadcast on nationwide television.

    Saint Patrick's Day Parade. The largest St. Paddy's parade in the world! Route is up 5th Ave from 44th St to 86th St and lasts from 11AM to about 2:30PM. Celebrations in pubs citywide happen the rest of the day and night until the green beer runs out.

    Labor Day (also known as West Indian Day Parade or New York Caribbean Carnival). An annual celebration held in Crown Heights, Brooklyn. Its main event is the West Indian-American Day Parade, which attracts between one and three million spectators, thus taking in more foot traffic in one day than the entirety of Toronto's Caribana festival. The spectators watch the parade on its route along Eastern Parkway. The large parade is held on American Labor Day, the first Monday in September.

Buy

New York is arguably the fashion capital of the United States and is a major shopping destination for people around the world. The city boasts an unmatched range of department stores, boutiques, and specialty shops. Some neighborhoods boast more shopping options than most other American cities and have become famous as consumer destinations. Anything you could possibly want to buy can be found in New York, including clothing, cameras, computers and accessories, music, musical instruments, electronic equipment, art supplies, sporting goods, and all kinds of foodstuffs and kitchen appliances. See the borough pages and district sub-pages for listings of some of the more important stores and major business districts, of which there are several.
Buying art

Anyone can freely create, display, and sell art, including paintings, prints, photographs, sculptures, DVDs, and CDs, based on freedom of speech rights. Thousands of artists earn their livings on NYC streets and in parks. Common places to find street artists selling their work are SoHo in Lower Manhattan and near the Metropolitan Museum of Art on 81st Street.
Outlets

New York City has a number of retail outlet locations, offering substantial discounts and the opportunity to purchase ends-of-line and factory seconds. Century 21 in Manhattan is one of the largest stores where New Yorkers get designer clothing for less.
Convenience stores

Basic food, drinks, snacks, medicine, and toiletries can be found at decent prices at the ubiquitous Walgreens/Duane Reade, CVS, and Rite Aid stores. For a more authentic New York experience, stop by one of the thousands of bodegas/delis/groceries. Although sometimes dirty-looking in apparent need of repair, you can purchase groceries, water, inexpensive flowers, coffee, and cooked food – typically 24/7.
Shopping in airports

Most shops in NYC airports are chain outlets, the same as can be found in most of large airports in the world--so it's pretty difficult to feel the spirit of the fashion capital if you only have 2 hours waiting for a connecting flight. At JFK airport, JetBlue Airways' new terminal 5 is populated with modern, cutting-edge restaurants and shops, but terminals 4 and 8 are also a good place for retail and duty free shopping.

From Newark, the best shopping can be found in United Airlines' main hub in Terminal C which has a massive selection of restaurants and shops with the offering from Terminal B being pretty poor in comparison (although the Port Authority is making improvements as of 2012), and almost non-existent from the domestic Terminal A.
Street Vendors

In New York City it is common for street vendors to set up tables on the sidewalk, close to the curb, and sell items. They are required to obtain a permit to perform this activity, but it is legal. Purchasing from these vendors is generally legitimate, although buying brand name goods from these vendors (particularly expensive clothing and movies) is ill advised as the products being sold may be cheap imitation products. It is considered safe to buy less expensive goods from these vendors, but most will not accept payment by credit card, so you will have to bring money. Be particularly wary of any street vendor that does not sell from a table (especially vendors who approach you with their merchandise in a briefcase) as these goods are almost certainly cheap imitation products.
Souvenirs

For most, a trip to the Big Apple isn’t complete without some memorable gifts and souvenirs to take back. There is a wide range of gifts and souvenirs that fits the needs and wants of every traveler or visitor to the city. For traditional types of souvenirs such as shot glasses, t-shirts etc, there are numerous shops that cater to these types of products in Manhattan.

Beware of tourist traps located around well known landmarks and locations. I Love NY Gifts and other stores in Times Square, Herald Square, and other heavily populated places of historical significance sells I Love NY logo and other products related to NYPD and FDNY among others for vastly overpriced prices. Similarly, restaurants around that area also price meals at a much heavier price to trick and scam unwitting, gullible tourists. Do not buy the souvenirs you want here. Go to independent shops or travel to Chinatown to get the same traditional gifts and souvenirs for much cheaper prices.


New York hosts many small/independent companies that design and/or produce gifts and souvenirs that in turn commission local NYC artists for the products. Many of theses items can be found in shops in certain neighborhoods throughout Manhattan and Brooklyn. One of the best places to shop for local products is Chelsea Market, where it is worth a visit for the food alone. Another noteworthy mention in NYC-2U, an online shopping store for NYC-related and locally produced NYC products. NYC-2U offers free delivery to visitors and travelers who are staying in hotels or addresses in the city, notably for Airbnb, Vrbo etc.
Eat

New York has, as you might expect of the Big Apple, all the eating options covered and you can find almost every type of food available and every cuisine of the world represented. There are tens of thousands of restaurants to suit all tastes and budgets, ranging from dingy $0.99-a-slice pizza joints to $500-a-plate prix fixe sushi and exclusive Michelin-starred eateries. Thousands of delis, bodegas, and grocery stores dot every corner of the city and DIY meals are easy and cheap to find. Street food comes in various tastes, ranging from the ubiquitous New York hot dog vendors to the many carts with Greek cuisine on street corners in mid-town. However in Midtown be wary of restaurants and bars both immediately on and around Times Square, within the Theater District or near the Empire State Building - many are tourist traps cashing in on travelers' gullibility and lack of local knowledge. New Yorkers wouldn't dream of eating out in such places; you shouldn't either! It pays to be adventurous therefore and reach out into the individual neighborhoods for a true authentic NYC dining experience. Even within Midtown, going a couple of blocks away in any direction from a major tourist street can make all the difference. Instead of eating on Times Square for example, venture two blocks to the west onto 9th Avenue to find a plethora of much more reasonably priced eating and drinking options.

One "must do" while in New York City is a slice of New York style pizza and buy gyros. Whether it's your first time to New York, or you are a seasoned New York visitor, getting a "slice of pie" is a tradition every visitor should make time for! But before you do, it might be fun to learn the history of New York pizza and why it's so famous.

Fruit stalls appear at many intersections from Spring to Fall with ready to eat strawberries, bananas, apples, etc available at very low cost. Vegetarians will find New York to be a paradise with hundreds of vegetarian-only restaurants and good veggie options in even the most expensive places.
Delis & Street Food

    The New York Bagel. There is no bagel like the New York Bagel anywhere else in the world. Bagels, which are a doughnut-shaped round of boiled dough with a distinctive, chewy, sweet interior and a leathery outer crust, arrived from the old world with Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe and have become utterly New York in character. You can get bagels anywhere in the city but, for the best bagels you may have to trek away from the main tourist sites. Many bagel connoisseurs consider Absolute Bagels at Broadway and 107th street to be the most traditional and best. Ess-a-Bagel on 21st and 1st Av. and 3rd Av. between 51st and 52nd Sts. also has a strong following. Many of the better bagel bakeries can be found in Brooklyn: one good spot is the Bagel Hole (see Prospect Park (7th Avenue of the F or G) or try looking in Midwood (Avenue J on the Q subway line). For the best bagels, go early when they are warm and straight from the oven. (Note that the famous H&H Bagels, featured in TV shows like "Seinfeld", went out of business in 2012, and its well-known Upper West Side location is now a cell phone store. A chain with a similar name, owned by one of the founders of the original, H&H Midtown Bagels East now operates several locations on the Upper East and Upper West Sides.)
    The Bialy. There's also a little-known cousin to the bagel, the bialy, which is like a bagel but the hole does not go all the way through, and topped with lightly caramelized onions. Kossar's Bialys on Grand Street at Essex is an ancient Lower East Side institution.
    The New York Hot Dog. Vendors all over the city sell hot dogs - affectionately called "dirty water dogs" by the locals - from pushcarts on city sidewalks and in parks. Choose your toppings from mustard, ketchup, and relish (or just ask for everything), wrap the dog in a paper napkin, and walk along the sidewalk trying not to let the toppings slip and slide all over your hands. Also recommended is Papaya King (several locations),[23] known for their inexpensive meals ($3.25 for a dog and a drink) and their blended tropical fruit drinks and smoothies. Or, take the Subway to Coney Island (D, F, N, Q trains, Coney Island - Stillwell Ave. stop) for the famous Nathan's hot dog (1310 Surf Ave).
    The New York Deli Sandwich. Another delicacy brought over by Jewish Immigrants, you must try either a corned beef or pastrami sandwich (a "Reuben" is always a good choice). There are some better known delis in the city, but the most famous one is Katz's Deli at Houston and Ludlow Streets. They have been around since 1888, and still pack them in day and night.
    The New York Pizza. A peculiarly New York thing, you can buy pizza, with a variety of toppings, by the slice from almost every pizzeria in the city. A New York pizza has a thin crust (sometimes chewy, sometimes crisp), plenty of cheese, and an artery-hardening sheen of grease on top. Buy a slice, fold in half lengthwise, and enjoy. If you just want a piece of plain cheese pizza, ask for "a slice." Or pick up one with pepperoni – the quintessential meal on the go in New York.
    The New York Cheesecake. Made famous by Lindy's and Junior's deli in New York, it relies upon heavy cream, cream cheese, eggs and egg yolks to add a richness and a smooth consistency. Now available throughout the city, but to get the original, go to Junior's, just off the Manhattan Bridge in Downtown Brooklyn (see Downtown Brooklyn) (B, Q, or R to DeKalb Ave)
    The New York Egg Cream. Also often referred to as a "Chocolate Egg Cream". A blend of chocolate syrup, milk, and seltzer water. One of the best is found at Katz's Delicatessen. Though not often on the menu at many diners, if you ask for one they will still prepare it for you at most locations.
    The New York Greek Gyro. You can find Greek gyro vendors scattered throughout the city. However, a quick stop into the famous Mamoun's locations will get you one of the best classic Gyro sandwich in the city (St. Mark's Place and MacDougal St). Don't forget to try out their hot sauce and to bring cash! [24] If you're in the Upper East Side and looking for a gyro that has recognizable meat, check out Amali Restaurant on E60th between Lex and Park St, primarily a fine dining Mediterranean restaurant, the restaurant has an outdoor grill where they make chicken and pork doner with organic meat from Upstate New York and even stuff some tasty fries into their sandwich. [25]
    The Halal guys The Halal Guys serves Halal/Middle Eastern food Offshoot of a famed food cart offering shawarma or gyros, chicken & rice platters & other Middle Eastern fare. Halal is not hard to find along predominantly Muslim parts of New York.

Restaurants

Maybe it's the size of New Yorkers' tiny kitchens, or perhaps it's the enormous melting-pot immigrant populations, but either way, this city excels at every kind of restaurant. There are fancy famous-chef restaurants, all ethnic cuisines and fusion/updates of ethnic cuisines (second-generation immigrants tweaking their family tradition), plus all the fashionable spots, casual bistros, lounges for drinking and noshing and more.
Credit cards

While most restaurants accept credit cards, some smaller restaurants, particularly in Chinatown and Williamsburg, do not. Others have required minimum purchase amounts for credit/debit purchases. Most establishments will prominently display this requirement, so keep your eyes open if you typically pay for meals with plastic.
Tipping

As in the rest of the United States, tipping is expected in New York restaurants. New Yorkers often calculate the base tip by doubling the tax. For more information, see Tipping in the United States.
Dress Codes

Restaurants with meal courses under $20 are unlikely to have any preference about what their customers wear. Of course, like most major cities, New York has some expensive, extremely fashionable restaurants that care about, and enforce, a certain level of dress among their customers - but "jackets only" restaurants are very uncommon nowadays.

If you're from elsewhere in the US and wish to "pass" as a local within Manhattan, pay attention to your shoes and coat.
Vegetarians

New York is a friendly place for vegetarians and vegans. There are many vegetarian only restaurants with offerings varying from macrobiotic food to Ayurvedic thalis or Asian Buddhist food. But, more importantly, almost every restaurant at every point on the price scale has vegetarian dishes that are more than an afterthought. Even Per Se, one of the most expensive and sought after restaurants in the city, has a seven course vegetarian tasting menu well worth the expense. DIY vegetarians will have no problem finding fresh vegetables, a wide variety of cheese, bread and prepared vegetarian foods in New York supermarkets.
Street Food

Nothing differentiates New York more from other American cities than the astonishing amount of food cooked and served on the streets. Starting with the thousands of hot dog stands on almost every street corner (try Hallo Berlin on 54th and Fifth for the best rated sausages), the possibilities are endless. People trek to Jackson Heights in Queens for a nibble of the famous arepas of the Arepa Lady. Freshly cooked Indian dosas are served up for a pittance at the NY Dosas stand in Washington Square Park. The Trinidadian/Pakistani Trinipak cart on 43rd and Sixth. Danny Meyer, the famous restaurateur, has a burger stand ("Shake Shack") in Madison Square Park as well as a new location on the upper west side. The halal offerings in midtown are legendary (Kwik-Meal on 45th and Sixth; Chicken Guy/Halal Chicken on 53rd and Sixth and many others). Most carts serve lunch (from about eleven in the morning to five or six in the evening) and disappear after dark, so look for a cart near you, smell what's cooking, and enjoy a hot and often tasty lunch for a few dollars (a meal costs anywhere from about $2-8). Mornings, from about 6AM-10AM, the streets are dotted with coffee carts that sell coffee, croissants, bagels, and danish pastries and are good for a cheap breakfast: small coffee and bagel for a dollar or so. From 10AM to 7PM many vendors sell lunch and dinner choices, including hot dogs, hamburgers, gyros, and halal. Other street vendors sell italian ices, pretzels, ice cream, and roasted peanuts. Also, look around for the coffee truck (often found in Union Square), dessert truck, as well as Belgian waffle truck that roam around the city.
Do It Yourself

New York's many markets and grocery stores make preparing your own food interesting and easy. Almost every grocery store, deli, or bodega has a prepared foods section where you can make your own salad (beware, you are charged by the pound!) or buy ready to eat foods such as burritos, tacos, curries and rice, lasagna, pastas, pre-prepared or freshly-made sandwiches, and many other types of foods. Whole Foods has five New York City locations, all with a variety of foods, and a clean place to sit and eat but any supermarket will have enough to take away to the park or your hotel room for a low cost meal. If you have a place to cook, you'll find almost any kind of food in New York though you may have to travel to the outer boroughs for ethnic ingredients. Most supermarkets have Thai, Chinese, and Indian sauces to add flavor to your pot, and many, especially in upper Manhattan, have the ingredients necessary for a Mexican or Central American meal, but go to Chinatown for the best Chinese ingredients, Little India in Murray Hill for Indian ingredients, Flushing for all things Chinese or Korean, Jackson Heights for Peruvian, Ecuadorian, and Indian, Flatbush and Crown Heights for Jamaican, Williamsburg for Kosher, Greenpoint for Polish, or Brighton Beach for Russian & Eastern European. Ask around for where you can get your favorite ethnic ingredients and you'll find traveling around in local neighborhoods a rewarding experience. There is also a Trader Joe's at Union Square for cheap but delicious supermarket buys. Western Beef Supermarkets offer more foods from different ethnicities than average supermarkets.
Drink

The only thing about New York City that changes faster than the restaurants is the bar scene. While some established watering holes have been around for decades or centuries, the hot spot of the moment may well have opened last week and could likely close just as quickly. The best way to find a decent bar is to ask the advice of a native dweller with trustworthy taste.

The following is a general overview of the popular neighborhoods for a night out. For more specific suggestions, see the relevant district pages.

    Greenwich Village - Probably the best neighborhood to go if you are in town for just a brief period. It is the equivalent somewhat of a Latin Quarter, full of locals of all ages, especially students attending NYU. There are many bars and jazz clubs around Bleecker Street and MacDougal, as well as near lower Seventh and Sixth Avenues.

    Chelsea - Lots of clubs and a thriving gay scene along Eighth Ave between 20th & 30th Streets. There is a mix of bars and of course not every bar is a gay bar. West Chelsea (27th-29th Streets, west of 10th Ave) is loaded with clubs. If you are European and looking for a discotheque, this is where you want to be.

    The Meatpacking District - Trendier bars and clubs and some expensive restaurants, including the Old Homestead, NYC's oldest steakhouse. Located between Greenwich Village and Chelsea, around 14th St and 9th Ave.

    The Lower East Side - Formerly the dingy alternative to the West Village, but has become trendier today. Ludlow Street is crawling with bars and small music venues in an area that may remind you of the Bastille in Paris. Rivington and Stanton Street are also viable options. The area has experienced an influx of hipsters in recent years.

    The East Village - Lots of bars located on Second Ave around 2nd St. There is also a sizeable cluster of Japanese bars, which are great fun, located on St. Mark's between 2nd and 3rd.

    Alphabet City - East of the East Village, this area was once a dangerous drug-addled hell hole; today it is cleaned up and loaded with bars. Heroin dens have been replaced with brunch places!

    Murray Hill - More hip with the 30-year-old crowd. The area around 29th St and Lexington Avenue has many Indian restaurants, but within three blocks there are plenty of watering holes, including a couple of fireman bars and an all Irish whiskey pub.

    Times Square - A very touristy area. The Marriot Marquis at Broadway & 45th has a revolving bar on the 50th floor. The Peninsula Hotel at 5th Avenue & 55th has probably the classiest rooftop bar in New York. The Rainbow Room at Rockefeller Center is often closed and has a dress code. The Hotel Metro on 5th Avenue & 35th also has a rooftop bar with fantastic, stress free, views of the Empire State Building. Very few New Yorkers would be caught dead at these places.

    Williamsburg - One stop into Brooklyn on the L train, this is the capital of NYC's hipster scene. There are plenty of bars along Bedford Avenue. Many of New York's small music venues are located here.

    Woodside - A 20-minute ride on the #7 train line from Times Square, this Queens neighborhood is a great for happy hour and drinking festivities before a Mets baseball game. There are several Irish pubs by the Woodside train station.

    Astoria - This Queens neighborhood, 25 minutes from Times Square on the N/W trains, is home to Queens' Bohemian Hall Beer Garden, near the Astoria Boulevard subway stop. This bar, popular in the summer, covers an entire city block, is walled and filled with trees, indoor and outdoor tables and a cool crowd, and serves great Czech and German beer.

    Bay Ridge - This Brooklyn neighborhood has one of the highest concentrations of bars in the city! The neighborhood has been generally Irish/Italian and does not have the hipster/yuppie scene common in New York.

    Park Slope - This Brooklyn neighborhood is the yuppie capital of New York and you are more likely to find a tea house serving soy milk than a bar here. Young couples pushing strollers is a common sight. There is some low-key nightlife, although in recent years this has been on the decline. A number of lesbian bars are located in this area.

    St. George - This Staten Island neighborhood has a few bars located south of the ferry terminal. Make a left when you leave the boat. Tourists take the trip on the ferry every year and never get off. Flashship brewery is a 5 minute walk from the ferry with has many locally crafted beers. Look for live music at the Cargo Cafe or Karl's Klipper, both located on Bay Street w/ phenomenal views of the Verrazano Bridge.

Last Call

Last call is 4AM, although many establishments will let you stay beyond that, especially in the outer boroughs. It is not uncommon to be locked in a bar after 4AM so people can keep drinking.
Tipping

Travelers from abroad should always follow local tipping customs when it comes to drinking at a bar. New York bartenders expect $1 for each drink served, even if it is a simple can of beer. The reason it's expected is that it represents the overwhelming majority of the bartender's wage. The bar owner typically does not pay the bar staff, with the exception of a symbolic "shift pay," which can be less than $5 an hour before taxes. The result is that on a slow night a bartender may make close to nothing, whereas on a busy Saturday they can walk out with a great deal of cash.

Seasoned bartenders will not hesitate to remind the drinker of this custom, and it is sometimes assumed that non-tipping foreigners are consciously withholding tips despite knowing better. A customer who does not tip may find the level of service drop precipitously.

While those not accustomed to this system may object to essentially bankrolling the salary of the staff, note that many bartenders will "buy back" your 3rd or 4th round (i.e. you get it for free), which can balance it out.

In short, happy bartenders make happy customers, and your generosity will usually be rewarded.
Liquor Stores

In New York State (this includes NYC), wine and liquor are sold at liquor stores, and are not sold at delis or supermarkets. Beer cannot be bought 4AM-8AM on Sunday morning (although if you look hard, you can get around this).

Liquor, wine and beer are almost always sold to you with a paper or plastic bag. Keep this bag on the alcohol. It is frowned upon to carry alcohol openly in the streets, as it is assumed you might be consuming it.
Local Beers

There are various local beers to try. Chelsea Brewing Company, Flagship Brewery, Heartland Brewery, Brooklyn Brewery, and SingleCut Beersmiths are worth a visit.
Drinking Age

In New York, as in most of the US, the legal drinking age is 21. Even if you're well over 21, make sure to keep your driver's license (sufficient for US & Canadian citizens), national ID card (usually sufficient for European citizens) or passport (sufficient for everyone else) at hand. Especially in touristy neighborhoods, it's not uncommon to be asked to prove your age as a matter of policy or court order - even at a restaurant. Outside of the touristy areas, and especially in Brooklyn, people tend to be more relaxed. However the State of New York allows under-age drinking provided that it is on private premises that do not retail alcohol and has parental consent. Under-age drinking is also allowed for religious purposes.
Sleep

The costs of hotel accommodation in New York City is generally higher than the American average. Manhattan in particular has some of the most expensive accommodation in the world, although some bargain hotels can still be found. Expect to pay up to $50 for a hostel, $100-200 for a budget room with shared bath, $250-350 for a mid-range hotel with a decent room and a restaurant and/or room service; right up to world famous luxury hotels such as the Waldorf Astoria or The Plaza, where a stay in the top suites can run into thousands of dollars a night. There is no shortage of choice and all of the major international hotel chains such as Hilton, Hyatt, Marriott, and Holiday Inn each have multiple properties in Manhattan. Most rooms below $200 in Manhattan are small with room for a bed, a tv, and little else, and may be located in less attractive areas of the island - for instance along the West Side Highway, or on the northern reaches beyond Central Park.
Alternatives to Manhattan accommodations

You don't have to stay in Manhattan. There are many hotels just outside Manhattan in Long Island City, Queens, Brooklyn and New Jersey that are cheaper than hotels in Manhattan. Also, due to the high accommodation prices and insider knowledge of the locals, you may want to consider a hospitality exchange!
Off-season

Lower accommodation prices are also generally available in January and February, the end of August, and on Sunday nights.
Taxes

Room rates are typically quoted excluding taxes, so expect your actual bill to be higher than the quoted rate. Taxes include New York State and New York City sales tax (8.875%), a New York City Hotel Occupancy Tax (varies but, for rooms above $40, $2 + 5.875%), and a surcharge of $1.50. For a $100 per night room, expect to pay $117.75, after taxes are taken into account.
Contact

Find free wireless hotspots across the city online at openwifinyc, OpenWifiSpots, NYC Wireless and WiFi Free Spot.

Wi-Fi is available in city parks and quite a few public libraries. The Apple store has dozens of computers setup and doesn't seem to mind that many people use them for free internet access, but they can be pretty busy at times. Easy Internet Cafe and FedEx Office are just some of the internet cafes which offer broadband internet at reasonable prices. Finding a store with an open power outlet may be difficult so be sure your device is fully charged and its battery is working properly.

Public phones are found all over the city so carry quarters if you plan to use them. Remember to include the 1 and area code when dialing from any phone in NYC - including private "land line" phones in buildings - as 11-digit dialing is always in effect, even when dialing locally.

For choosing a mobile network OpenSignal provide crowdsourced cellular coverage maps of New York for comparing the carriers. Note, in US English "carrier" means "network" or "mobile network operator. Be aware that some operators (such as Sprint and Verizon) use CDMA, this means you cannot get a SIM from these carriers. In addition, operators may use different network bands to those your phone uses, make sure you check this. You can also find information on network bands used by each network on OpenSignal's network specific pages (e.g. T-Mobile network coverage, AT&T network coverage).

If you are traveling from overseas, you may need to unlock your cellphone before it can be used with a local carrier. One store that specializes in this service is New Wave Inc., located in Midtown Manhattan. (New Wave Inc.)
Stay safe

New York is statistically the safest city in the United States and miles away from its situation when it was considered the "murder capital of the United States". Its crime rate per person is lower than the national average and many small towns and there is high police presence almost everywhere in the city today. However, there are several dangerous neighborhoods throughout the five boroughs and some things to watch out for such as:

Law Enforcement in NYC- The New York Police Department has full police powers within the 5 boroughs. NYPD marked cruisers are white body with blue decals and lettering. New York Sheriff also have jurisdiction. The NYPD is the largest police force in America. The NYPD invested in sophisticated technology and equipment to deter crime and terrorism. CCTV cameras are in use in several areas of the city and NYPD has special units in the city that is strategically placed to ensure that the city is safe. NYPD police vehicles have bulletproof shielding on their vehicles and bulletproof glass inserts on the driver and passenger side doors. New York State Police Troop NYC division also assists local police and troop NYC division have jurisdiction in NYC. The port authority police department which is a bi-state agency between New York and New Jersey have police powers in both states. The Port Authority Police provides law enforcement services to all airports- John F Kennedy, La Guardia, Newark Liberty, Teteroboro and Stewart Airports. They also provide law enforcement services to all sea ports, bridges and tunnels in and out of city, Bus Terminals, Port Authority Trans Hudson and World Trade Center, however they can arrest and question anyone in NY and NJ.


Pickpockets - This is one of the most common crimes happening in the city. ALWAYS watch your personal belongings and if possible don't carry unneeded cash with you or any important documents such as passports or IDs. Be very wary in the metro especially during rush hour (if possible have your bag in front of you) and Times Square, which is a hotspot for pickpockets. Also, be on the lookout for outright muggings.

Scams - New York City can be considered a scammer's paradise due to the large variety of scams found all around the city. Probably the most famous one is the "pay here for the ferry to Staten Island"; never fall for this one because the Staten Island ferry is completely free! In Times Square avoid people selling CDs and movies. Also avoid the costumed characters. These characters are waiting for people to take pictures with them (as you use your own camera or phone) and then afterwards they practically demand a tip, which they didn't mention before you took the picture. Don't take photos of them without their permission. And be careful as they sometimes will jump in front of your camera, even though you were NOT taking a picture of them, and then demand a tip for their "appearance" in your picture. If they persist just notify the police and they will take care of the situation. There are also many fake "monks" in the area trying to lure people into giving them money for a good cause. All around the city there are many stores selling fake products directly aimed at tourists (locals know about them so they avoid them) such as bags, necklaces, rings, mobile phones, iPads etc. Finally, don't give money to beggars in the metro as most of them are lying and just trying to trick passengers.

Traffic - New York City's traffic can be chaotic at times. Traffic jams are common, signs can be confusing and due to the fact that pedestrian streets are crowded there have been many fatalities. Keep in mind that car break-ins are frequent in the city; don't leave anything valuable inside your car that can be seen from the outside. If you decide to move around by taxi, don't enter unmarked cabs as these cabs aren't monitored by the central authorities that regulate taxis. Only use real taxicabs that have a sign stating the driver's name and also a license plate.

Subway - The NYC subway has always suffered from a bad reputation, whether it's from the unbearable heat on subway platforms in the summer, to the very high amount of crimes that happen. The truth is crime still does happen and tourists (and locals alike) need to exercise caution. Always be careful of your belongings as pickpockets run rampant inside the trains and on platforms. Don't ride the subway late at night if you can avoid doing so, and if you have to take the subway late at night, avoid empty cars and preferably sit in the middle one (the conductors department). Stay alert when entering or exiting deserted stations.

Anti-Semitism - Anti-Semitism is an increasing problem in the USA, and New York City, with the largest Jewish population in the world outside Israel, is seeing a similar increase.

Nightfall - After nightfall stick to the main avenues, beware of your surroundings and don't enter dark, deserted alleys. You may encounter no problems if you stay in crowded places but it's always better to go out in pairs or a group if possible. Don't enter public parks after dusk.

If you need directions, asking a clerk or cashier in a store is a good option. You can ask a local on the streets for directions, but sometimes they may appear to be too busy or in a hurry to give you detailed directions.

Despite the fact that crime in New York City has decreased over several years, there are still many neighborhoods that are dangerous. Most of them are out of the city center and have little to nothing for tourists to see so you may not find yourself there anyway. Below are some areas tourists may visit but should use caution:

    Harlem - While Harlem has long had a reputation for being crime-ridden it has seen significant gentrification in recent years. This has ushered a significant decrease in crime to the point that it is safe for tourists to walk in Harlem during the day. After dark, however, is another story. It's better to take a cab to commute through this area and do your best to avoid Upper Harlem which still sustains many of the elements that used to make the entire area off-limits years ago.
    Bronx - Large parts of the Bronx are indeed very sketchy, but not all can be considered dangerous. There are actually some nice neighborhoods especially around the Bronx Zoo. However, tourists should be careful at night in areas such as Mott Heaven, Soundview, Fordham. Highbridge, and Bedford Park that have issues related to gang violence and drug dealers or addicts. One sketchy neighboorhood though that should definitely be avoided though is Hunts Point. Unless you're going there to meet family or friends, you most likely would have no reason to go to this area. But exercise caution if you do.
    Central Park - Central Park is an oasis during daytime and may offer a much needed break from the concrete jungle and noisy streets of New York City. Sometimes it can be a great place to take in during the daytime, however, at night, its dark appearance hides some criminal elements. You may think that it would be nice to have a walk in the park at night under the stars, but it's better to wait until a safer time in the day to visit.

Cope
Travel Warning

NOTE: New York City has some of the nation's strictest gun laws. Weapons permits issued elsewhere — including New York State permits — are not honored within the five boroughs of the city. Some popular venues have a "No guns" sign posted outside, leading people to falsely assume such weapons are prohibited only in certain places. In fact, they're just as illegal outside these venues as inside. Attempting to leave weapons with security guards or police prior to entry will likely lead to very serious criminal charges. This also applies even if you're just passing through by air (LaGuardia and JFK) or by car.


Costs

New York is, along with San Francisco, by far the most expensive city in the United States in which to both live and visit, although from a tourist perspective, you can expect the costs to be comparable to other major "world cities" such as London, Paris and Tokyo. One of the biggest expenses when visiting New York is accommodation - the median rate for a decent hotel room in Manhattan seldom dips below $200 a night for example, although there are techniques (see the "#Sleep" section above) to lower the cost. On the flip side, eating out in restaurants - is relatively inexpensive given the massive amount of competition and choice on offer. As with most major tourist destinations, New York has its fair share of "tourist traps" in terms of eating and drinking options, which can trap the unwary.
Information

    Citizen Service Center, tel 311 (lines open 24/7) - New York City's official non-emergency help line, available in 171 languages for questions (parade hours and routes, parking restrictions, transport problems) and complaints (litter, noise pollution, access).

Babysitting

    Baby Sitters' Guild, +1 212 682-0227 . Bookings daily 09:00-21:00, cash payments only. For stressed and busy parents visiting New York, round-the-clock baby-sitting is available short- or long-term from $20 per hour (4h minimum) and cab fare (approx. $10). Multilingual sitters are also available.
    Barnard Babysitting Agency, +1 212 854-2035. Students of Barnard College babysit for around $16 an hour, minimum two hours, plus a $20 registration fee.

Smoking
Smoking in public places is highly restricted. It is prohibited in indoor sections of bars, restaurants, subway stations and trains (all transit system property), public parks, public beaches, pedestrian malls, both indoor and outdoor stadiums and sports arenas, and many other public places. If you light up in any of these places, you are subject to a summons and fine, ejection, and/or indignant reactions from residents. There do remain a small number of legal cigar bars that are exempt, as are the outside areas of sidewalk cafes and the like, but these are very much the exception. If you need to smoke while eating or drinking, be prepared to take a break and join the rest of the smokers outside, whatever the weather; many establishments have large space heaters. As in most US cities, drinking alcoholic beverages on the street is illegal, so bars will not let you take your drink outside. 

Link: https://wikitravel.org/en/New_York_City